ASSESS WHETHER YOUR BUSINESS TRADES WITH THE UK OR MOVES GOODS THROUGH THE UKIf it does:REGISTER your business with the national customs authority to trade with non-EU countries, if you have not done so yet. ASSESS whether your business has the necessary resources and capacitysystems, storage–) and holds all necessary customs authorisations to import or export. ASK your national customs authority which existing customs simpli˜cations and facilitations  CONSIDER applying for Authorised Economic Operator (AEO) status from your national customs authority. TALK to your business partners (suppliers, intermediaries, carriers–) as Brexit might also impact your supply chain.February 2019 CONTACT YOUR NATIONAL CUSTOMS AUTHORITY FOR THE LATEST UPDATES ON INFORMATION SPECIFIC TO YOUR COUNTRYIrelandhttp://gov.ie/Brexit https://www.revenue.ie/brexithttps://www.prepareforbrexit.com/brexitqueries@revenue.ieMaltahttps://customs.gov.mt/bus/what-does-brexit-mean-for-my-business-VISIT THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION™S WEBSITE FOR FURTHER INFORMATION AND FOR E˚LEARNING MODULES ON CUSTOMS AND TAXhttps://ec.europa.eu/taxation_customs/uk_withdrawal_enBREXIT CHECKLIST  FOR TRADERS Print     ISBN 978-92-79-99889-8     doi:10.2778/867580     KP-01-19-119-EN-CPDF      ISBN 978-92-79-99879-9     doi:10.2778/50098       KP-01-19-119-EN-N‚BREXIT PREPAREDNESS CHECKLIST™ FOR COMPANIES DOING BUSINESS IN THE EUSeptember 2019This checklist has been developed for information purposes and is meant to help companies doing business in the EU and/or in the United Kingdom (UK) to double-check their state of preparedness for the withdrawal of the UK from the EU without a withdrawal agreement. While care has been taken to address what would appear to be the most common issues and relevant aspects, the list is indicative and should not be considered to deal exhaustively with all matters that may arise as a consequence of a withdrawal without an agreement. Additional guidance should be sought from the ‚Brexit preparedness notices™ published by the Commission Services and information by national authorities. Some of the notices are referred to, by way of example, in the footnotes of this checklist. All ‚Brexit preparedness notices™ are available here: https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness/preparedness-notices_enCompanies have to ensure full preparedness for the withdrawal date, i.e. the date when the United Kingdom agreement, the ‚transition period™ agreed therein does not apply.and the EU Customs Union would cease to apply to the UK. Preparedness would thus be required in any case, albeit at a later stage.This checklist is a dynamic document, which will be updated, as necessary.   1. Placing goods on the EU market; exportsIn order to ensure product safety and the protection of public health and the environment, the placing on 1 by a body established in the EU or an authorisation by an authority of an EU Member State. This is the case, for example, for the medical devices sector, or the automotive sector2 .valid in the EU.body or authority, or sought new ones?have to be established in the EU (localisation requirements). This is the case, for example, for the ‚responsible person™4, the importer, or the registrant5 or marketing authorisation holder6 of certain goods. In some areas, such as chemicals,  this is particularly relevant for the ‚downstream use™ of goods. Post-Brexit, persons established in the UK will no longer comply with these localisation requirements.c. Labelling and markingsthe body or person referred to in sections 1.a) and b) of this checklist. This is the case, for example, for industrial products8,  pharmaceuticals9 and medical devices, and food10 and animal feed.Post-Brexit, those markings or labelling, when referring to bodies or persons established in the UK, no longer comply with labelling requirements when placed on the EU market11. 1       2  ) or the EU ecolabel (see ). 4   5   6   https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness/preparedness-notices_en#sante 8    9   https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness/preparedness-notices_en#sante 10  notices™ per sector. Have I ensured compliance with EU-localisation requirements?Have I ensured that products placed on the EU market are correctly labelled and marked?When exporting products to third countries with which the EU has a Free Trade Agreement, the products may ‚rules of origin™, documented with a proof of origin12. This is relevant, for example, in the automotive sector (incl. car parts or other components) and in the agro-food sector.requirements, i.e. the protection of the health, security and safety of Europeans, as well as the environment, all goods entering or leaving the EU are subject to customs supervision, and are subject to a customs procedure. Post-Brexit, this applies to goods entering/leaving the EU from/to the UK. An EORI number issued by the UK customs authorities, as well as customs decisions issued by UK customs authorities in the context of EU customs EU14.  15 that will apply post-Brexit, in particular if I have so far had little or no experience in trading with third countries?In order for certain foreign goods to be released for free circulation in the EU, import duties must be paid. The amount of this duty is calculated based on various factors, including the customs value (i.e. price paid or 16. Post-Brexit, certain goods originating in the UK are subject to import duties.  g. Prohibitions and restrictionsIn order to protect in particular the health and safety of EU citizens, as well as the environment, the import to and export from the EU of certain goods is subject to ‚prohibitions and restrictions™.  This concerns very 18 to medicines19 and from certain agro-food products20 to rough diamonds, cultural goods21 or certain radioactive material.22 Post-Brexit, the prohibitions and restrictions for imports from third countries, and export to third countries, apply in respect to the UK. Moreover, UK licences for the import/export of goods into/from the EU will no longer be valid.12
See also the dedicated ‚Brexit checklist for traders™ available here: https://ec.europa.eu/taxation_customs/uk_withdrawal_en#heading_1.14  15  https://ec.europa.eu/taxation_customs/uk_withdrawal_en 16  18  19  https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness/preparedness-notices_en#sante20  https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness/preparedness-notices_en#sante21   22   Have I examined my supply chains and treated any UK input as ‚non-originating™ from the EU, with a view to Have I assessed whether customs duties will be due post-Brexit (and can I provide the necessary information), in particular if I have so far had little or no experience in trading with third countries?Am I acquainted with the EU rules for prohibitions and restrictions that will apply post-Brexit, in particular if I have so far had little or no experience in trading with third countries?In order to protect food safety and animal health and welfare and to protect the EU™s sanitary and phytosanitary status, live animals , food24 and animal products and certain plants and plant products25 are systematically controlled, upon importation, in dedicated facilities (border inspection posts).  2. Provision of services in the EUEU rules, in many economic areas the provision of services in the EU requires a licence or authorisation by an authority of an EU Member State. This is the case, for example, in the transport sector26sector, in the audio visual sector28, and in the energy sector29. Post-Brexit, licences or authorisations issued by UK authorities are no longer valid across the EU. In some cases, validity in a given EU Member State will depend on national law.Does my business rely on licences or authorisations issued by UK authorities? Have I applied for similar As a client/customer, did I check whether my provider has the licence or authorisation required to provide services in the EU? b. Cross-border provision of servicesThe freedom to provide services Œ a ‚fundamental freedom™ enshrined in the EU Treaties Œ allows for EU-wide cross-border provision of services, within the limits of EU law. Post-Brexit, the provision of services from the UK to the EU will be subject to EU and Member State law, taking many business sectors, particularly if EU businesses continue to work with service providers established in the UK.Have I assessed whether I need to rely on services provided by entities established in the UK?Have I assessed whether I can continue to rely on cross-border services from the UK?24   25  26     https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness/preparedness-notices_en#move 28  https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness/preparedness-notices_en#cnect29  https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness/preparedness-notices_en#enerHave I ensured that the SPS commodities will enter the EU via a Border Inspection Post approved for the relevant commodity?In order to facilitate the free movement of persons and the provision of services, the recognition, in one by EU law.3. Other aspectsacquisition of goods or services takes place within the EU or cross-border with a third country. Post-Brexit, the EU-rules for cross-border supply from a third country apply.Am I acquainted with the EU and national rules applicable to cross-border supply to/from the UK? This is relevant for both services and goods.A unitary trademark and design, as well as an EU system of geographical indications and EU-rules on plant variety rights ensure the protection of these intellectual property rights throughout the EU.Post-Brexit, the protection granted by these rights no longer applies to the UK territory.Have I taken the necessary steps to ensure continued protection of my intellectual property rights in the UK?The recognition and enforcement by one Member State of judgements in civil and commercial matters handed down in another Member State is greatly facilitated by EU law.Post-Brexit, the recognition and enforcement of UK judgements will be governed by the (national) rules for third country judgements.Have I re-assessed a choice of UK jurisdiction in my commercial contracts?  . https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness/preparedness-notices_en#justd. Personal dataEU law provides for the transmission of personal data across EU Member States without additional requirements. Post-Brexit, the transmission of personal data from the EU to the UK is subject to the rules for data transfers to third countries. This is relevant for many business sectors, particularly if EU businesses continue to work with data-centres located in the UK.Have I taken the necessary steps to ensure compliance with EU rules if I transfer personal data to the UK?e. UK-registered companiesEU law provides for the recognition, in a Member State, of a company incorporated in another Member State40. Post-Brexit, the recognition of UK-incorporated companies in the EU will depend on (national) law for third country-incorporated companies.If my company is incorporated in the UK, have I checked against national law that having the central f. Direct taxationNational rules on direct taxation of companies have to take account of EU law, including harmonisation measures in certain cross-border situations.Post-Brexit, the rules for direct taxation of companies in situations involving the UK will be those applicable to third countries.Have I taken the necessary steps to ensure compliance with national rules for direct taxation where the UK is involved?40
MEMO/16/
UROPEAN COMMISSION MEMO 19 December 2018 Questions and Answers: the consequences of the United Kingdom leaving the European Union without a ratified Withdrawal Agreement (no deal Brexit)
This present document is for information purposes only
Citizens & social security
1. What will be the legal situation of UK nationals resident in the EU in case of no deal? Can they continue to work in their Member State of residence and travel freely across the whole EU? Will they need specific documents and can they apply already for those?
In today's Communication, the Commission has called upon Member States to act along the following lines regarding the rights of UK nationals to stay and work in EU27 Member States in case of no deal:

ake measures so that all UK nationals legally residing in a Member State on 29 March 2019 will continue to be considered as legal residents of that Member State without interruption;
tand ready to issue residence permits to the UK nationals concerned as evidence of their legal stay and right to work;
ake all necessary legislative and administrative measures to be able to issue temporary residence documents by the withdrawal date, and to process applications for definitive residence permits under the uniform format by the end of 2019.


In the second Communication on Brexit preparedness from 13 November 20181, the Commission had:
called upon Member States to include the periods of legal residence in an EU27 Member State prior to the withdrawal when assessing if a UK national fulfils the 5 years of residence condition;  recommended that Member States accept applications for residence
In addition, UK nationals who are family members of EU citizens having exercised the right to free movement will enjoy the right to move and reside  Finally, UK nationals resident in one of the EU Schengen states, who hold a residence permit, can travel freely in the Schengen area for short stays (up to 90 days outside the country of residence).
2. What will be the legal situation of EU citizens residing in the UK in case of no deal?
The Commission has called upon Member States to take a generous approach to UK nationals who are already resident in their territory. The Commission expects the reassurances given by the UK authorities  that, even in case of no deal, the rights of EU citizens in the United Kingdom will be protected in a similar way  to be formalised soon so that it can be relied upon by citizens.
3. Will periods of legal residence of a UK national in an EU27 Member State before the withdrawal date count towards acquiring a long-term residence permit in that Member State?
The Commission confirmed in its Communication of 13 November 2018 that, in the Member State of residence, periods of legal residence of UK nationals prior to withdrawal also count for the purpose of attributing EU long-term resident status to UK nationals (and their third-country family members) under the terms of Directive 2003/109/EC.

https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/HTML/?uri=CELEX:52018DC0880&from=EN

4. What happens, in case of no deal to the old-age pension of an EU27 citizen who is currently retired in the UK and receives an old-age pension from one or more EU27 Member States?
The Commission has called upon Member States to continue paying old-age pensions to EU27 citizens who are already residing in the UK on 29 March 2019 and remain there after that date. Nothing in EU law prevents Member States from paying pensions to beneficiaries residing in a third country.
5. In case of no deal, what happens to the old-age pension of an EU27 citizen who at one point worked in the UK before 30 March 2019?
The Commission has called upon EU27 Member States to ensure that EU27 citizens who worked in the UK for periods before 30 March 2019 retain their right for those periods to be taken into account when his or her right to an old-age pension is determined and calculated by the relevant Member State. Furthermore, the place of residence of the person entitled to the old-age pension, whether in the EU27 or in the UK, should not be of any relevance.
6. In case of no deal, what happens to old-age pension rights acquired by UK nationals from periods worked in (an) EU27 Member State(s) before 30 March 2019 if the person decides to retire in an EU27 Member State, the UK or another third country?
The Commission has called upon EU27 Member States to ensure that UK nationals
who exercised their right to free movement within the EU at a time when the United Kingdom was an EU Member State  retain their rights for their periods of insurance or employment completed in EU27 Member States before 30 March 2019 so that this is taken into account by EU27 Member States when determining and calculating their old-age pensions.



Transport
General
7. Why are you proposing contingency measures for aviation but not for rail transport? Are you treating modes of transport differently in case of no deal?
The withdrawal of the UK from the EU without a deal will cause disruption in all modes of transport, but to a different degree. In particular, some modes of transport benefit from an international system, which will remain in place in a no-deal scenario and provide limited, continued basic connectivity. Moreover, in many areas it is possible for economic operators to take preparedness actions. Contingency measures do not compensate for the lack of preparedness actions from stakeholders.
In aviation, there is no existing regulatory fall-back option that would allow the continuation of basic connectivity for air transport services between the EU and the UK. In road transport, the existing fall-back options (European Conference which leads the Commission to propose a contingency measure to ensure some basic connectivity for road haulage.
As regards the maritime sector, existing international rules will enable some basic connectivity. In general, EU rules already allow stakeholders and national authorities to prepare, before the withdrawal date, for a possible no-deal scenario by making sure that they obtain the relevant certificate from an EU27 Member State (e.g. railway undertakings can establish themselves in one of the EU27 Member States to obtain an operating licence or they can request safety certifications from EU27 authorities, airline pilots can apply for EU27 licences, seafarers can obtain recognition in the EU27 of the UK certificate, etc.).
For more details, stakeholders should consult the Commission preparedness notices on the various modes of transport.
Aviation  market access
8. Will there still be plane connections between the UK and the EU in case of no deal? What exactly is the EU proposing to ensure this? What will happen if the UK does not reciprocate the measures taken by the EU?
In case of no deal, the Commission is proposing that "point-to-point" flight connections, i.e. connections from the territory of the United Kingdom to the
https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness/preparedness-notices_en#move

territory of the EU27, are temporarily allowed on the basis of a unilateral measure. This measure will enter into force in case of no deal, if the United Kingdom reciprocates, and last until 30 March 2020. This is to avoid a full interruption of traffic between the EU and the United Kingdom. To ensure reciprocity, the proposal would enable the Commission to adopt appropriate measures, such as adjusting the allowable capacity available to UK air carriers, or requiring Member States to adapt, refuse, suspend or revoke the operating authorisations of UK air carriers, if the Commission were to determine that rights granted by the UK to EU air carriers are not equivalent to those granted to UK air carriers.
9. Why is the Commission limiting its contingency proposal to only ensuring basic connectivity between the EU and the UK (so called 3rd and 4th freedoms)?
A no-deal scenario will cause significant disruption. As mentioned in the Communication of 19 December 2018, contingency measures cannot replicate the benefits of membership of the Union, nor the terms of any transition period, as provided for in the draft Withdrawal Agreement. Basic connectivity refers to the level and volume of air transport services that will suffice to cover the basic needs of the Member States' economies and mitigate to some extent the impact of withdrawal, without however guaranteeing the continuation of all existing air transport services under the same terms as they are supplied today.
10. Will the Member States be able to conclude additional bilateral agreements with the UK in addition to the measures at the Union level?
An EU level response will be the best way to ensure that EU27 interests are properly protected in any scenario, including no-deal. In case of no deal, the EU legislation on basic air connectivity proposed today will be implemented. There will be no need for Member States to enter into bilateral negotiations. A unified and clear aviation relationship between the EU as a whole and the UK is largely preferable, allowing all European airlines to continue to operate basic air routes between any Member State and the UK and ensure a level playing field.



Aviation  ownership and control
11. In case of no deal, will EU airlines still be allowed to fly if they fail to meet the EU's ownership and control requirements at the time of the withdrawal?
As explained in the notice to stakeholders regarding air transport published in January 20183, in order to maintain the validity of an operating licence, and the freedom to provide intra-EU air services, all the conditions for the operating licence need to be respected, including being majority EU-owned and controlled. If the conditions are no longer fulfilled as a consequence of the be valid. Stakeholders have been made aware of the above since the early stage of the withdrawal process and are in a position to take all measure required to remain in compliance of EU law for the sake of business continuity. For more details, stakeholders should consult the Commission preparedness notices on air transport.
Aviation  safety
12.
What does the Commission's proposal on aviation safety concretely include?

extends for a limited period of time  9 months  the validity of certain certificates (in particular type certificates) that can only be issued by the European Union Aviation Safety Agency (EASA) on the basis of certificates issued by the UK once it is a third country;
ensures that parts and appliances, for which a certificate of conformity was issued by a UK company before the withdrawal date, can still be used in and on aircraft although the company that issued the certificate is no longer entitled to issue new certificates.
13. What should stakeholders do to mitigate the impact of a no deal as regards aviation safety requirements?
Many holders of UK certificates (e.g. pilots, mechanics, examiners, instructors, etc.) have the possibility to obtain, already now, a certificate from an EU27 Member State. There have recently been many applications filed with EU27 Member States to transfer licenses.
https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/file_import/air_transport_en.pdf
https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness/preparedness-notices_en#move

Where UK-based entities have to hold a certificate issued by EASA, companies are able to apply already now to as third country organisations. EASA has started processing certain early applications in order to anticipate the situation of the UK becoming a third country without a deal. Such certificates would  For more details, stakeholders should consult the Commission preparedness notices on aviation.
Aviation  security
14. Will passengers coming from the UK and transiting via EU airports have to undergo an additional security check in the EU airport? And what will apply to cargo operations?
The repetition of security checks in EU airports will be a great inconvenience to travellers and pose considerable burdens on EU airports. To mitigate some of this impact, as announced in the Communication of 13 November 2018, the Commission intends to use the existing possibility to recognise a third  regime as equivalent for a limited period of time, so that additional security checks will remain unnecessary in case of transfer/transit of passengers coming from the United Kingdom and transferring or transiting at EU airports.
Road  haulage
15. Will trucks be able to continue carrying goods between the UK and the EU if the UK leaves in case of no deal? Is there a restriction in numbers?
The Commission is proposing that operators from the United Kingdom are temporarily allowed to carry goods into the Union, provided the United Kingdom confers equivalent rights to Union road haulage operators and subject to conditions ensuring fair competition. This measure shall enter into force in case of no deal, and cease to have effect on 31 December 2019.


https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness/preparedness-notices_en#move

16. What will be the terms and conditions of cabotage operations in case of no deal?
In case of no deal, cabotage by UK operators in the European Union will not be possible.
17. Will passenger cars be able to drive between the EU and the UK if the UK leaves without a deal? Is there a restriction in numbers?
Passenger cars registered in the United Kingdom will be allowed to drive to the European Union and vice-versa. There is no restriction in numbers. The only condition is that the vehicles (and drivers) comply with the relevant rules of the 1968 Vienna Convention on Road Traffic (or the 1949 Geneva Convention on Road Traffic for vehicles and drivers from Ireland, Cyprus, Malta and Spain). For more details you should consult the Commission preparedness notice on travelling of 13 November 2018.

Road  Bus services
18. Will the EU take any contingency measures in this area? Would Member States be allowed to make bilateral agreements with the United Kingdom, to ensure the continuation of cross-border services?
The EU does not intend to take any contingency measures in this area. The UK has signalled that, following its withdrawal from the European Union, it intends to become a Contracting Party to the Interbus Agreement of 2002 in its own right, which is in principle possible. This would allow transport by bus or coach as occasional services to be performed. The Interbus Agreement only covers occasional services, but a Protocol extending its scope to regular and special regular services has recently been agreed and is being ratified, hence bilateral agreements between individual Member States and the United Kingdom will not be needed.


https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/brexit_files/info_site/travelling.pdf

19. Are UK driving licences going to be recognised in the EU in a no deal scenario?
In a no-deal scenario, UK driving licences will be recognised in the European Union (and vice-versa) on the basis of the 1968 Vienna Convention on Road Traffic (and the 1949 Geneva Convention on Road Traffic in the case of Ireland, Cyprus, Malta and Spain).
For more details you should consult the Commission preparedness notice on travelling of 13 November 2018.
Rail transport
20. Will train services continue between the United Kingdom and the European Union in a no-deal scenario?
To continue operating in the EU, train operators need an EU operating licence and an EU safety certificate, as well as train drivers licensed in an EU Member State. Currently its operating licence and safety certificate, as well as licences held by some of their drivers, are issued by the UK authorities and will cease to be valid in the EU27 as of the withdrawal date in a no-deal scenario.  The Commission's services have been in contact with operators on the need to fulfil the abovementioned requirements and to speed up the process in order to ensure the continuity of the service between the United Kingdom and the European Union in a no-deal scenario. This work will need to be completed rapidly to ensure the service continues running without significant interruption.  For more details, stakeholders should consult the Commission preparedness notices on rail transport.





https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/brexit_files/info_site/travelling.pdf
8 https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness/preparedness-notices_en#move
10 Financial Services
21.What exactly is the Commission proposing in the area of financial services?
After examining the risks linked to a no deal scenario in the financial sector, and taking into account the views of the European Central Bank and the European Supervisory Authorities, the Commission has concluded that only a limited number of contingency measures is necessary to safeguard financial stability in the EU27. These measures mitigate financial stability risks only in those areas where preparedness actions from market operators alone are clearly insufficient to address these risks by the withdrawal date. This is why the Commission has adopted today two temporary and conditional equivalence decisions prolonging the access of EU firms to UK central clearing counterparties (CCPs)
and UK central security depositories (CSDs) 10, for 12 and 24 months respectively.
In addition, the Commission is amending two Delegated Regulations in order to preserve the regulatory treatment of derivative contracts currently exempted from the clearing obligation and the bilateral margin requirements that EU law imposes, when such contracts are transferred from the UK to the EU27. Such flexibility would be granted for a period of 12 months following the withdrawal date.
22.Why is the Commission restricting itself to the measures proposed for certain derivative contracts and certain equivalence decisions in case of no deal?
As indicated by the Commission in the Communication of 13 November 2018, contingency measures shall be strictly limited to what is necessary to deal with major disruptions. They cannot offset some of the costs created by the application of two separate regulatory and supervisory frameworks, nor remedy delays that could have been avoided by preparedness measures and timely action by relevant operators. This is why, beyond the two identified risks, it is the responsibility of market participants to mitigate possible risks by timely adaptation to this new situation.
Commission decision determining, for a limited period of time, that the regulatory framework applicable to central counterparties in the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland is equivalent, in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 648/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council
10 Commission implementing decision determining, for a limited period of time, that the regulatory framework applicable to central securities depositories of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland is equivalent in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 909/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council
11
For more details, stakeholders should consult the Commission preparedness notices on financial services.11
23.Will banks and insurers with headquarters in the UK be able to continue to provide services in the EU in case of no deal?
In case of no deal, entities headquartered in the UK providing banking services will no longer be allowed to provide services in the EU on the basis of their current authorisations.
Similarly, in case of no deal, UK insurance undertakings will no longer be allowed to provide services in the EU, including through online sales, on the basis of their current authorisations.
Financial institutions that wish to provide banking or insurance services in the European Union should take all necessary steps to be properly authorised on withdrawal date, including by establishing presence in the EU27.
For more details, stakeholders should consult the Commission preparedness notices on financial services.12
24.Will I be able to use in the EU those payment methods issued in the UK in case of no deal?
In case of no deal, payment institutions authorised by UK competent authorities will not be allowed to provide payment services in the European Union, as of the withdrawal date, or through the use of branches located in the Member States, under their current authorisations. Entities headquartered in the UK providing payment services, as well as e-money issuing, will no longer benefit from the authorisation to provide those services and activities in the European Union..
The possibility to use payment methods depends on the respective preferences of merchants and international payment methods are usually recognised throughout the world.
11
https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexi
preparedness/preparedness-notices_en#fisma 12
https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness/preparedness-notices_en#fisma
12 Nevertheless, EU law sets limits to interchange fees charged to merchants in respect of intra-EU transactions. Thus they will no longer cover transactions between the EU-27 and the United Kingdom after withdrawal date and higher fees may be charged.  Provided that merchants are allowed to apply surcharges on consumers for card payments, this may lead to a higher surcharge for card payments.
For more details you should consult the Commission preparedness notice on travelling of 13 November 2018.13
25.In case of no deal, will I need to change my car insurance or follow any specific procedure to drive in the EU27 with a car insured in the UK?
If you travel to the EU27 from the United Kingdom with a UK-registered vehicle, you should make sure, prior to travelling, that your motor insurance policy covers the EU, as this might not be the case under the Green Card system, and that a Green Card is present in your vehicle14
For more details, you should consult the Commission preparedness notice on travelling of 13 November 2018.15
Sanitary and Phyto-sanitary (SPS) rules
26.What is the exact scope of the contingency measures on veterinary legislation and when will they be in place?
In case of no-deal, EU rules in public/animal health areas will no longer apply to the UK. Therefore, the entry of animals and their products from the UK into the EU will only be allowed if the UK is listed as an authorised third country in the relevant sectors of EU legislation.
The contingency measures announced in the Commission Communication of 13 November 2018 foresee that the UK will be added to the lists for live                                            13 https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/brexit_files/info_site/travelling.pdf
14 For more information, see the Commission preparedness notice on travelling of 13 November 2018, p. 20. 15 https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/brexit_files/info_site/travelling.pdf
13 animals and animal products, subject to providing guarantees that all applicable conditions under the veterinary or sanitary legislation will be fulfilled. In a no deal scenario, the listing of the United Kingdom should enter into force on 30 March 2019.
27.Will live animals and animal products be checked at the borders when entering the European Union from the United Kingdom after 29 March 2019 in case of no deal?
In case of no-deal, every consignment of live animals and animal products coming from the UK would have to undergo, as of the withdrawal date, checks in Union border inspection posts (BIPs) at the point of entry into the EU
For more details, stakeholders should consult the Commission preparedness notice on EU rules for food, feed and sanitary and phytosanitary controls.16
28.In case of no deal, are these checks also necessary if these products come from another Member State, but transit through the United Kingdom? In case of no-deal, simplified border controls (limited to documentary checks, for instance) will apply to live animals and animal products coming from a Member State but transiting through the UK. For more details, stakeholders should consult the Commission preparedness notice on EU rules for food, feed and sanitary and phytosanitary controls.17
29.Does the Commission have flexibility when approving the necessary Border Inspection Posts for SPS checks and how fast will approvals take place?  Certain flexibilities are provided for in the applicable EU legislation, e.g. accepting temporary premises for inspection rooms or sharing commercial facilities for the storage of consignments. In order to be ready by 30 March 2019, the new or extended border inspection posts must be proposed by the Member States to the European Commission before 15 February 2019.
16
https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness/preparedness-notices_en#sante 17
https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness/preparedness-notices_en#sante
14
30.What are the health requirements for pets accompanying holders that visit the EU in case of no deal?  In case of no deal, the "EU pet passport" issued before the withdrawal date to a pet owner resident in the United Kingdom will no longer be valid as of withdrawal date. Travellers from the UK are advised to bear in mind that they might need a health certificate including a valid anti-rabies vaccination and a valid rabies antibody titration test.   For more details you should consult the Commission preparedness notice on travelling of 13 November 2018.18
Customs
31.In case of no deal, will goods coming from the UK to the EU/EU to the UK be considered as imports/exports as of 30 March 2019? As of 30 March 2019, goods which are brought into the customs territory of the European Union from the United Kingdom or are to be taken out of that territory for transport to the United Kingdom, are subject to customs supervision and may be subject to customs controls in accordance with the Union Customs Code. This implies inter alia that customs formalities apply, declarations have to be lodged and customs authorities may require guarantees for potential or existing customs debts.
For more details, stakeholders should consult the Commission preparedness notice on EU rules for customs and rules of origin.19
32.Can I already apply for authorisations and access to customs IT systems or must I wait for 30 March 2019? Economic operators may already in advance of the withdrawal date apply for authorisations and access to customs IT systems at the competent customs authority. That is in general the customs authority of the place where the become applicable after the withdrawal date.                                            18 https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/brexit_files/info_site/travelling.pdf
19
https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness/preparedness-notices_en#tradetaxud
15 In particular, the Commission would like to draw the attention of those companies who were so far not involved in customs activities, but already trading with the United Kingdom as an EU Member States, on the importance of preparedness actions in advance of withdrawal date.
33.In case of no deal, what will happen to goods which started their transport before withdrawal date, but which arrive in the EU/the UK after? In case of no deal, these goods will be considered non-Union goods when they are brought into the EU customs territory. The UK will decide on how to deal with the goods entering their territory after its withdrawal.
Taxation
34.In case of no deal, will there be any tax refunds on goods I purchased in the United Kingdom and brought back to the European Union? In case of no deal, the UK will decide whether it will allow tax refunds for goods that are exported from its territory by EU citizens as of withdrawal date.
For more details, stakeholders should consult the Commission preparedness notice on indirect taxation,20 as well as the .preparedness notice on travelling of 13 November 2018.21
35.What rules will apply to EU-UK trade in terms of VAT in case of no deal? In case of no deal, existing EU legislation with regard to VAT will continue to apply within the European Union. As of withdrawal date, the rules of the EU VAT Directives relating to third countries will apply in the relations with the UK. This means that, in case of no deal, VAT will be due at the importation in the EU. Goods will be exempt from VAT if they are dispatched or transported to a destination outside the European Union, including, therefore, the UK.
20
https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness/preparedness-notices_en#tradetaxud 21 https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/brexit_files/info_site/travelling.pdf
16 For more details, stakeholders should consult the Commission preparedness notice on indirect taxation,22 as well as the .preparedness notice on travelling of 13 November 2018.23
36.What about goods that started their transport before withdrawal date, and arrive in the EU/the UK after? Will I be taxed twice? If these goods are transported to the European Union, their importation will be subject to VAT (and they will not be taxed anymore as intra-EU acquisitions).
Climate change
Greenhouse gases market mechanisms  ETS
37.Scheme (EU ETS) be affected?
Measures guaranteeing the smooth functioning of the EU ETS and the EU carbon market in case of no deal were adopted in February 2018.
They will ensure that, in case of no deal, UK operators would have fully complied with their 2018 obligations as of withdrawal date, and the system can function without participation of the UK after that date.
38.In case of no deal, will the UK be able to auction or issue allowances in the Emission Trading System? The Commission has decided to temporarily suspend, as of 1 January 2019, the acceptance of all relevant processes in the Union registry until the ratification process provides legal certainty on the participation of the UK in the EU ETS 2019 and 2020 compliance cycles. In other words, the UK will neither be able to auction nor issue for free any allowances or exchange international credits into allowances as of 1 January 2019 until the ratification                                            22
https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness/preparedness-notices_en#tradetaxud 23 https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/brexit_files/info_site/travelling.pdf
17 instrument of a Withdrawal Agreement is notified to the Council's Secretary-General by the European Union and the UK. Accounts in the Union Registry administered by the United Kingdom and accounts in the Kyoto Protocol registry of the United Kingdom will no longer be accessible as of the withdrawal date.
For more details, stakeholders should consult the Commission preparedness notice on EU climate policy.24
Application and entry into force of contingency measures
39.Will the contingency measures apply to Gibraltar?
As of the withdrawal of the United Kingdom, all applicable EU law will cease to apply to the UK and to Gibraltar. As a consequence, contingency measures addressing the United Kingdom will not apply to Gibraltar.
40.Why are the contingency measures different as regards their application in time?
The time limitations proposed for each and every contingency measure and/or proposal adopted today depend on the various situation of the sector concerned. For instance, regarding road transport, the time limitation takes into account the annual Council of the European Conference of European Ministers of Transport.

24
https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness/preparedness-notices_en#clima April 2019EUROPE DIRECT CONTACT CENTREphone number for citizensThe Europe Direct Contact Centre (EDCC) is for citizens who have questions about the European Union. The Contact Centre is able to answer by phone or email in any of the 24 official EU languages.Freephone from all EU Member States: 00 800 6 7 8 9 10 11. Online form: https://europa.eu/european-union/contact_enBrexitpreparedness, it answers to questions-scenario. To this end, it remains open over some weekends. 109,000 questions in 201827,000 questions between January-March 2019Approximately 1,300questions on Brexitbetween January-March 2019.This is the same amount of Brexit-questions of the entire year 2018.86% of questions directly answered85% of clients satisfied16%of questions from outside the EU40EDCC staff approximately14 seconds in average to pick up the phoneExamples of Brexit-related questionsA UK citizen living in France since 2010 is wondering what she must do to be able  to stay in France after Brexit.A football team planning to travel to Sheffield on 17-19 May wants to know whether they need a visa. A citizen wants to know if she could still go to the UK with her ID card in case of a no-deal Brexit.Do I have access to the European Court of Justice if my rights under the Good Friday Agreement are violated after Brexit?What would be the rights of UK nationals living in Spain in the event of a no-deal Brexit?How can I bring food, medicine and a pet into the UK after Brexit?How will the pension coordination between the UK pension authority and the one in Germany look like after Brexit(according to the different possible scenarios).Can you please do everything to keep the UK in the EU?Will the EU operating licenceof my helicopter firm become obsolete after Brexit?CountriesTopicsIf you intend to travel between the UK and the EU1 in the event of ‚no deal™, the following will apply:1. Border checks, visa and customs checks, VAT refund1.1 Border checks and visas- For UK nationals travelling to the EU2Will UK nationals be subject to additional checks?As a UK national, you will no longer be entitled to use the separate EU/EEA/CH lanes at EU border crossing points, and you will be subject to additional checks that you did not have to go through before the UK™s withdrawal. In particular, border guards may ask you to provide information, for instance on the duration and purpose of your stay, as well as on your means of subsistence during your stay. You will need to bring a passport, which was issued within ten years preceding the date of travel, and which The Commission has proposed that UK nationals can travel visa-free to the EU for short stays (i.e. stays of up to 90 days in a 180-day period), if the UK also grants the same arrangement for citizens from all EU Member States. Your passport will be stamped both when you enter the EU and when you leave it, so that this period of 90 days, which is visa-free, can be calculated. - For EU citizens travelling to the UK Will EU citizens need a visa to enter the UK?The UK has announced that EU citizens can travel to the UK visa-free for short visits of up to three months.As an EU citizen, you would be allowed to travel to the UK using your passport or, for the time being, your national The UK consular authorities of the country where you live are best placed to provide more information. EU Member States after the UK leaves the EU  Area TRAVELLING BETWEEN THE UK 1.2 Customs checksWhat about my luggage and goods?If you are travelling from the UK to the EU, you should be aware that:Your luggage and other goods will be subject to customs checks. The UK may apply similar requirements to EU citizens entering the UK;goods, plants, plant products, or certain animals. There may be similar restrictions to EU citizens going to the UK;If you carry goods in your luggage or hand-baggage, you will be entitled to duty free allowances (this Commission website:1.3 VAT refundsWhen travelling from the UK, can I get VAT refunds for goods I have purchased in the 27 EU Member States?Yes. As a visitor from outside the EU, you are entitled to a refund of VAT paid on goods you purchased during your stay in the EU, provided that the goods are presented to customs with the VAT refund documents when you leave the EU.2. Passenger rightsWill EU passenger rights continue to apply to EU citizens travelling to and from the UK and EU?Air passengers4a UK airport to an airport in the EU, and vice versa.from the UK to an EU airport.What about passengers with reduced mobility?mobility travelling by air when you leave from, transit through, or arrive at an airport in the UK. However, EU prevention of refusal of carriage and obligation to provide information).  -Ship passengersBus passengersRail passengersthe railway company is licensed under EU rules.3. Validity of tickets  date? EU passenger rights on reimbursement if:4. Healthcare when travelling  As an EU citizen, will I be able to use the European Health Insurance Card in the UK?No, EU citizens will no longer be able to access healthcare in the UK with their European Health Insurance Card.not, consider taking out private travel insurance.As a UK national, will I be able to use the European Health Insurance Card when travelling in the EU?No, as a UK national you will not be able to access healthcare in an EU Member State on the basis of the European Health Insurance Card. If you are insured in the UK and you intend to travel in an EU Member State, check with your health insurance travel insurance.5. Driving licencesIn the EU, the recognition of driving licences issued by third countries is regulated at national level. Therefore, you should check the national rules in each of the EU Member States in which you intend to drive. Some EU Member States require that you hold an international driving permit to drive in their country.You should check with the authorities of the EU Member State(s) in which you intend to drive regarding the rules for recognising UK driving licences.That depends on UK law. The UK has announced that you can continue to drive on a valid EU driving licence when you visit the UK.6. Pets Will there be conditions when travelling with pets? If you are travelling with your pet from the EU to the UK, you should check which requirements the UK intends to apply to people travelling from the EU. You may need either a third country pet passport, or an animal health If you are travelling with pets from the UK to the EU, you will have to respect EU rules on the movement of pets. These rules provide that the pets:Must have received an anti-rabies vaccination;Must have undergone a rabies antibody titration test;Must comply with any preventive health measure for diseases and infections other than rabies;7. Roaming  Will EU roaming rules continue to apply in the UK?be bound by EU roaming rules when operating in the UK. This means that these companies may apply surcharges to UK customers using roaming services in the EU, and to EU citizens using roaming services in the UK.The Commission™s preparedness notice on travelling;The Commission webpage on entering the EU from a non-EU country .  Reuse is authorised provided the source is acknowledged. The reuse policy of European Commission documents is regulated by I am a UK national living in an EU Member State. Will I still have  All EU Member States are preparing measures to ensure that UK nationals who are legally residing in their territories on the withdrawal date will continue to be considered as legally residing.nationals. Therefore, you will in principle no longer be covered by EU free movement rules. This means, for example, that even if you have acquired permanent residence in a Member State, this does not give you the right to move and live in another Member State. Your residence rights as a third country national will be determined by national legislation and EU directives concerning legal immigration. (see also next question.) All Member States should be ready to issue residence permits as evidence of your right to stay in that Member State and your right to work. These permits may be temporary for an initial transition period, but should gradually to take some administrative steps, depending on the approach chosen by the Member State where you live. Please Brexit preparedness website1.2. If you have lived in an EU residence permits before the withdrawal date. 1 2members3rules4. They will not be able to rely on EU free movement rights even if they have acquired permanent residence 5.Checklist for UK nationals and their non-EU family members:If you have not already done so, you should  national authorities6  of the Member State (for third country family members). is putting in place to ensure  (and their family members) and Brexit preparedness website7 . For more information, contact the relevant national authorities of your Member State of residence. as soon as these become available from the relevant national authorities. It is important to have these documents with you when travelling abroad.the EU free movement rules, when the UK was an EU Member State. Your situation will be governed by EU rules on third country nationals and national rules in the EU Member State concerned. While the situation will vary across Member States, many Member States are preparing to grant, for a certain period, a preferential status to down by EU law and national law concerning third country nationals in order to continue to live and work in an EU Member State. Your social security rights may also change. Member States on the 8 and on the EU Immigration Portal . As a UK national in the EU, you are advised to:seek information about rules and procedures to continue living and working there from the authorities of the Member State where you live; Family members who are either UK nationals or who have the nationality of another third country.4  family member or in the case of divorce.5 6 7 8 9 https://ec.europa.eu/immigrationobtain proof of the periods of work, residence, study and tax contributions in the Member State where you live;immediately apply for either temporary or permanent immigration status under national immigration rules.For more information, please consult the Questions and Answers on the consequences of the United Kingdom . EU Member State. You will fully retain your right to move and stay freely under EU free movement rules.Example State of which he or she is a national. 11.ExampleEU free movement rules. Your rights will be determined by EU and national immigration laws.10 11  As of the withdrawal date, you will no longer have voting rights in local elections in the Member State where you live based on EU law. It is up to each EU Member State to determine whether and under what conditions you may participate in local elections as a third country national. The Member State where you live may thus decide to grant you electoral rights as to any other third country national or based on reciprocity. You should check in the Member State where verify with the competent authorities of that Member State whether you are entitled to continue to serve until the end of the mandate on the basis of the national law of that Member State. should verify with the competent authorities of their Member State whether they are entitled to continue to serve until the end of the mandate pursuant to the national law of that Member State.as of the withdrawal date, but as for local elections, you may maintain that right if so provided for in national law. Reuse is authorised provided the source is acknowledged.  EU1I am an EU citizen living in the UK. Will I still have the right to live ﬁwants to reassure EU citizens and their family members living in the UK that they are welcome to stay in the UK in the unlikely event of a ‚no deal™ scenario.ﬂ24
The 5  >

The 8

A coordinated approach in the area of medicines and medical devices in case of a ‚no-deal™  scenario.The medical sector: A priority of the European Commission™s preparedness work from the start.The EU is prepared for a ‚no-deal™ scenario. EU legislation will allow us to mitigate the impact of such a scenario. What have we done?The Commission has called on stakeholders to prepare for a possible ‚no-deal™ scenario as early as May 2017. Since then, several preparedness notices and guidance documents have been issued on medicines and medical devices. These areas were also carefully assessed in the Commission Communications of July 2018 and November 2018. Economic operators are primarily responsible for taking the necessary measures to ensure their continued compliance with EU legislation. This is also the best way to ensure the continued safety and reliability of medicinal and medical device products in the EU and to avoid supply shortages in the case of ‚no-deal™. In addition, the following measures have so far been taken: Medicines: The Commission, the European Medicines Agency (EMA) and national authorities have been able to facilitate the transfer of marketing authorisations for medicines from one UK rapporteur competent authority to another. Notices, Questions and Answers, and Guidance documents on preparedness have been published by the Commission as early as May 2017. They have been regularly updated. The European Medicines Agency has been relocated from London to Amsterdam.The Commission has issued guidance to EU27 Member States on the timely transfer of batch testing sites from the UK to the EU27.A network has been put in place bringing together the Commission, national regulators and the European Medicines Agency to monitor the situation, address any problems of supply and inform patients and doctors accordingly. April 2019Medical Devices:  The Commission and Member States have been closely monitoring the progress of the transfers  (i.e. private entities designated by Member State competent authorities). placing their products on the EU27 market for a limited period of time. The Commission has issued guidance to EU27 Member States.  Managing potential shortagesThe risk of shortages of medicines and of critical medical devices in case of a ‚no-deal™ scenario has been MedicineŁ  National regulators, the European Medicines Agency and the Commission will monitor the situation, address problems and inform patients and doctors appropriately. This structure is built on existing strategies to deal with incidents and shortages.Medical devicesŁ and to identify critical medical devices that may be at risk of shortages. Ł What impact would a ‚no-deal™ scenario have on the EU budget?The impact of a ‚no-deal™ scenario will be felt throughout the European Union, but it is clear that some What contingency measures have been taken?The European Commission has therefore proposed a measure which would enable the EU to be in a contracts signed and decisions made before withdrawal, if:ﬁBrexit assistance packageﬂ: Additional Dedicated Funding How?AgricultureŁ Ł Private storage aid and withdrawal schemesFisheriesŁ Ł  Additional special measures (subject to possible adjustments):State aidData protection is of fundamental importance in the European Union. The EU has the strongest and most modern data protection rules in the world, which are becoming a global standard.In case of a ‚no-deal™ scenario, the EU has a comprehensive set of rules governing the transfer of personal data to third countries. This is the basis on which transfers will then take place with the United Kingdom (UK). These rules include in particular the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR), and the Law Enforcement Directive.Data transfers to third countries are possible under the General Data Protection Regulation using:Standard Contractual Clauses: Business operators can rely on these clauses for data transfers to third countries. Binding Corporate Rules: Legally binding data protection rules can apply within a corporate group.personal data if they contain binding and enforceable commitments by the organisation in the third country Derogations: Exceptions to the rule are possible on the grounds of explicit consent, performance of a contract, exercise of legal claims or important reasons of public interest (see below). DATA PROTECTIONApril 2019Practical steps to be taken by public authorities and companies when transferring data to the UK: Identify what processing activities will imply a personal data transfer to the UK.Determine the appropriate data transfer instrument for the situation.Implement the chosen data transfer instrument to be ready for the withdrawal date. Indicate in the internal documentation that transfers will be made to the UK.If relevant, update the privacy notice accordingly to inform individuals.Data transfers based on derogations: what are they for? Derogations, namely exceptions to the rule of having to put in place appropriate safeguards, must be interpreted  restrictively and be related to occasional and non-repetitive processing activities.  These derogations include cases such as: relevant risks.The transfer is necessary for the performance or the conclusion of a contract, or the contract is concluded in the interest of the individual.  The data transfer is necessary for important reasons of public interest (e.g. to ensure cooperation between authorities in social security matters). The data transfer is necessary because of compelling and genuine interests of the organisation.12345In a ‚no-deal™ Brexit, access to UK waters will be governed by United Kingdom legislation in accordance with international law. UK vessels will no longer have automatic access to EU waters, and vice versa. The EU has fully prepared for a ‚no-deal™ scenario. Two contingency measures have been adopted:    An amendment to the Regulation on the Sustainable Management of the External Fleets: this would ensure that the EU is in a position to grant UK vessels access to EU waters until the end of 2019, on the condition that EU opportunities, as agreed in the Agriculture and Fisheries Council of 17 and 18 December 2018. UK waters.   The Commission will work closely with the Member States concerned to assess the impacts of a potential loss of access to UK waters and to coordinate the use of a range of mitigation tools. This can take many forms: ranging from EU emergency measures to the use of temporary cessation aid by the Member States concerned.relevant criteria, within the existing framework, to assess the viability and scale of potential displacements in  FISHERIESApril 2019EU police and judicial cooperation in criminal matters is key to keeping Europeans safe. The EU has a comprehensive framework in place to ensure that police and judicial authorities cooperate closely in preventing and prosecuting crime and terrorism, be it through information exchange, judicial cooperation procedures or via EU agencies. genuine Security Union.Consequences of a ‚no-deal™ for the UK In case of a ‚no-deal™ Brexit this legal framework will, however, no longer apply to the UK. This means in particular that:The UK will be disconnected from all EU networks, information systems and databases; Judicial cooperation procedures will no longer be pursued in an EU framework; The UK will no longer be able to participate in EU Agencies. It will be a third country and will be treated as such. Switch to a bilateral and multilateral approach, and other measuresIn case of a ‚no-deal™ Brexit, cooperation between the EU27 and the UK will switch to already existing alternative bilateral or multilateral legal frameworks and cooperation mechanisms. The Commission has worked with Member States to ensure appropriate contingency action and to be prepared to use reliable fall-back mechanisms for any scenario, particularly regarding the following issuess: Disconnection from EU networks, information systems and databases;Transfer from the Schengen Information System to Interpol;Cooperation with EU Agencies including Europol, Eurojust and eu-LISA;Judicial cooperation on pending criminal cases (European Arrest Warrant, Transfer of Prisoners, European Investigation Order, etc.).  POLICE AND JUDICIAL April 2019The EU27 have been preparing, assisted by the Commission, for the switch to these alternative cooperation  ﬁFall-back instrumentsﬂ by the Commission1EU instrumentFall-backSchengen Information System (SIS)2Interpol databases (documents, vehicles) and notices (persons)Supplementary Information Request at the National Entries (SIRENE bureaux) channelInterpol channel, existing bilateral channelsEuropol3Interpol, bilateral channels, possibilities of exchange of data by way of derogations based on Article 25 of Swedish Initiative4 (general framework for sharing law enforcement information between Member States)Interpol, existing bilateral channelsSecond Additional Protocol to the European Convention on Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters from 2001 (ETS 182)UN Palermo Convention (transnational organised crime) ensures a minimum level of approximationFIU.Net (Financial Intelligence Units)Financial Action Task Force (international), Council of Europe Warsaw Convention, EGMONT secure web ARO (Asset Recovery Offices)5bilateral channelsEuropean Image Archiving System (FADO)6Interpol Stolen and Lost Documents Database 12-the Second Generation Schengen Information System (SIS II) by the services in the Member States responsible for issuing

18.12.2007, p. 103.EU instrumentFall-backCooperation on Football Disorder7Integrated Safety, Security and Service Approach at Football Matches and Other Sports Events (CETS 218)8Joint Investigation Teams (JITs)9 - Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters between Member States of the European Union10Second Additional Protocol to the European Convention on Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters from 2001 (ETS 182)Joint Action on Organised Crime11United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized CrimeEURODAC12None necessary; UK will no longer participate to the Cybercrime Directive132001 CoE Convention on Cybercrime (ETS 185) with 2003 Additional Protocol concerning the criminalisation of acts of a racist and xenophobic nature committed through computer systems (ETS 189)15Combating the sexual abuse and sexual exploitation of children and child pornography16Combating child pornography on the internet172007 CoE Convention on the Protection of Children against Sexual Exploitation and Sexual Abuse (CETS 201)187-tional dimension, OJ L 121, 8.5.2002, p. 1.
10-tance in Criminal Matters between the Member States of the European Union - Council Declaration on Article 10(9) - Declaration by the United Kingdom on Article 20, OJ C 197, 12.7.2000, p. 3Œ23; Council Act of 29 May 2000 establishing between the Member States of the European Union, OJ C 197, 12.7.2000, p. 1.11-an Union, establishing a mechanism for evaluating the application and implementation at national level of international 12criteria and mechanisms for determining the Member State responsible for examining an application for international protection lodged in one of the Member States by a third-country national or a stateless person and on requests for the comparison with Eurodac data by Member States™ law enforcement authorities and Europol for law enforcement purpos-1315OJ L 335, 17.12.2011, p. 1.1718EU instrumentFall-backbeings19United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Children; 2005 CoE Convention on Action against 20European Arrest Warrant2122231983 Second Additional Protocol to the European Convention on Extradition (ETS 98)2010 Third Additional Protocol to the European Convention on Extradition (CETS 209)252012 Fourth Additional Protocol to the European Convention on Extradition (CETS 212)European Investigation Order271959 CoE Convention on Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters (ETS 30)281978 Additional Protocol to the European Convention on Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters (ETS 99)292001 Second additional Protocol to the European Convention on Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters (ETS 182)302001 CoE Convention on Cybercrime (ETS 185)3119-2021  -dures between Member States - Statements made by certain Member States on the adoption of the Framework Decision, OJ L 190, 18.7.2002, p. 1.22 232527-28293031EU instrumentFall-back32 1990 CoE Convention on Laundering, search, seizure 332005 CoE Convention on Laundering, Search, Seizure Financing of Terrorism (CETS 198)Transfer of Prisoners351983 CoE Convention on the transfer of sentenced persons (ETS 112)1997 Additional Protocol to the Convention on the 372017 Protocol amending the Additional Protocol to the Convention on the Transfer of Sentenced Persons (CETS 222)38European Criminal Records Information System (ECRIS)39Article 13 of the 1959 CoE Convention on Mutual Assistance in Criminal MattersMutual Recognition of Financial Penalties40Criminal Judgments (ETS 70)323335-tion to judgments in criminal matters imposing custodial sentences or measures involving deprivation of liberty for the purpose of their enforcement in the European Union, OJ L 327, 5.12.2008, p. 27.373839European Union in the course of new criminal proceedings, OJ L 220, 15.8.2008, p. 32.Over 3 million EU citizens live or work in the UK and 1.3 million UK nationals live and work in the EU. The European Commission has consistently made clear that protecting the rights of citizens in a ‚no-deal™ scenario is a priority.In a ‚no-deal™ scenario, EU rules on free movement and social security coordination will no longer apply to and in the United Kingdom. As a result, we have put in place a series of , at EU and national level.EU27 Member States have prepared national contingency measures, coordinated by the Commission, to ensure  for UK nationals already legally residing in a Member State. The Commission and Member States are actively reaching out to UK nationals residing in the Union in order to inform them about their rights. UK nationals who already legally reside in a Member State for over 5 years may have access to the EU long-term resident status. The Commission has welcomed the UK™s policy that, even under a ‚no-deal™, EU citizens in the United Kingdom will be protected. This is a matter of UK national competenceWith the Contingency Regulation on Social Security Coordination, the Commission aims to ensure that social security entitlements in relation to the UK acquired by EU27 or UK nationals before Brexit are protected. Periods of employment and self-employment, insurance or residence, and facts and events that occurred in the UK before Brexit, will still be taken into account.The Contingency Regulation is: April 2019unilateral coordinated contingency approach for all EU27 Member States.The Coordinated Approach goes further than the Regulation, covering also:Exportation of old-age pensions to the United Kingdom;ongoing at the time of withdrawal;Medical treatment that is ongoing on the withdrawal date;UK but working in the EU27 provided by the United Kingdom before withdrawal.Individual Member States can decide to go further, for instance by continuing to export to the UK unemployment In the event of ﬁno dealﬂ, EU1 rules on consumer rights will no longer apply to the United Kingdom from the withdrawal date. Under certain conditions, EU consumers may however still be covered by provisions in EU consumer law if they purchase in the UK or from a UK trader.What are my rights as a consumer from one of the 27 EU Member States if I buy goods from a shop or website in the UK?Under EU law, if you conclude a contract with a trader in another country and it can be proved that the trader directs his/her commercial activities in your EU Member State of residence, the law of the Member State where you live applies. On that basis, courts in EU Member States will continue to apply EU consumer protection rules even if the trader is based in the UK.This includes in particular the rules set out inthe Unfair Commercial Practices Directivethe Consumer Rights Directivethe Unfair Contract Terms Directivethe Consumer Sales and Guarantees Directivethe Price Indication Directive the Package Travel Directive CONSUMER RIGHTS  IN THE EVENT OF  ﬁNO DEALﬂ March 2019Will I have to pay extra taxes or charges if I buy online from the UK?If you live in an EU Member State and you buy goods online, which have to be imported from the UK, you will have to pay import duty and other indirect taxes (e.g. VAT).All goods imported from the UK to the EU will also be subject to customs checks, including the application of prohibition and restriction measures.For further info, see:  https://ec.europa.eu/taxation_customs/individuals/buying-goods-services-online-personal-use_enAs a customer based in an EU Member State, can I sue a UK-based trader before a court in an EU Member State? If you are a consumer living in an EU Member State and you decide to take a trader in the United Kingdom to court in a Member State, the UK™s withdrawal has no consequences for you as long as the trader has marketed the goods in the country where you live. EU rules continue to apply and allow you to sue the trader in the EU If the UK-based trader has not marketed the goods in your EU Member State, your rights as a consumer will depend on UK law.Can the judgment of a court in an EU Member State be enforced in For the recognition and enforcement in the UK of a judgment from a court in an EU Member State (and of a judgment by a UK court in the 27 EU Member States) national rules apply in the EU and in the United Kingdom. In practice, this means that a judgment from a court in an EU Member State can only be enforced in the UK if a UK court decides to recognise the judgment.Will I still be able to settle a dispute out of court with a trader in the UK?apply to the United Kingdom. You will no longer be able to use the EU online dispute resolution platform to settle disputes with traders established in the United Kingdom. Will my package holiday bought from a travel agency in the UK That depends on whether the UK-based organiser from which you have bought the package holiday has marketed it in your EU Member State. If this is the case, the organiser would be obliged, as any organiser established in a third country, to provide insolvency protection for you according to the law of your EU Member State. If the travel agency in the UK has not marketed the package holiday in your EU Member State, your rights as a consumer will depend on UK law.Will Brexit impact the safety and quality of medicines put on the market in the EU?No. The UK™s withdrawal will have no impact on the high quality and safety that patients in the EU expect from the medicines they take. A medicine dispensed by a pharmacy or administered by a doctor in an EU Member State before the UK™s withdrawal.In principle, your access to medicines should remain unchanged. However, even the best preparation cannot fully exclude the possibility that there might be a temporary impact on the supply of some medicines.The European Commission and the European Medicines Agency are carefully monitoring the situation. Each national government has a role to play. In any case, shortages of medicines are unfortunately not rare and already happen are experienced in dealing with this and take the necessary actions so that patients get the right advice about their treatment. Which data protection rules do companies have to comply with when transferring data outside the EU?EU rules on data protection (the General Data Protection Regulation) allow for the transfer of personal data to a third country if the controller or processor has provided appropriate safeguards.These safeguards are:Standard data protection clauses. Three sets of model clauses are available on the Commission™s website:  https://ec.europa.eu/info/law/law-topic/data-protection/data-transfers-outside-eu/model-contracts-transfer-personal-data-third-countries_enBinding corporate rules: legally binding data protection rules approved by the competent data protection authority that apply within a corporate group;Approved Codes of Conduct, together with binding and enforceable commitments of the controller or processor in the country outside the EU where the data is transferred;or processor in the third country.© European Union, 2018 Reuse is authorised provided the source is acknowledged. The reuse policy of European Commission documents is regulated by Decision 2011/833/EU (OJ L 330, 14.12.2011, p. 39).ISBN 978-92-76-00446-2           DOI 10.2775/50558          NA-04-19-222-EN-CThe United Kingdom (UK) will leave the European Union (EU) on Friday 29 March 2019 at midnight. This   1. YOU NEED TO PREPARE FOR 30 MARCH 2019 1 January 2021Agreement. 30 March 2019. Therefore, all businesses concerned have to prepare, make all necessary decisions, and complete all required administrative actions, before 30 March 2019 in order to avoid disruption.SEVEN THINGS July 2018 3. CERTIFICATES, LICENSES, AND AUTHORISATIONS  4. CUSTOMS, VAT AND EXCISE  5. RULES OF ORIGINgoods.  6. PROHIBITIONS AND RESTRICTIONS           FOR IMPORT/EXPORT OF GOODS  2. RESPONSIBILITIES IN THE SUPPLY CHAIN1  2  This document is presented for information purposes only and should not be understood as a legal text. Its content is without prejudice to the negotiations on the Withdrawal Agreement and the discussions on the future EU-UK relationship. CHECK THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION™S          PREPAREDNESS NOTICESpreparedness notices1    WHERE CAN I FIND MORE INFORMATION          AND WHO CAN ASSIST ME?preparedness notices2sectors. They are meant to help all market participants prepare.departments and agencies active in the area that   7. TRANSFER OF PERSONAL DATAIn the case of ‚no deal™ you should know that as an EU citizen studying or training in the UK, you will be subject to UK rules on residency. The UK government has announced that you do not need to apply for any immigration status or visa if you do not intend to stay in the UK for more than 3 months. However, you will need to apply for ﬁEuropean Temporary Leave to Remainﬂ to stay longer than 3 months 1.I am an Erasmus+ student studying at a UK university on the date of the UK™s withdrawal. Will my learning exchange be interrupted? No. The European Parliament and the Council have agreed on a Regulation to ensure that ongoing learning mobility exchanges are not interrupted. The Regulation would apply to students in higher education, apprentices and pupils in vocational education and work and youth leaders.You should note, however, that the Regulation only covers learning exchanges starting before the withdrawal date. as an Erasmus+ student. Can I still go ahead?that would, if adopted, enable the EU to continue funding Erasmus+ in the UK during 2019. Whether you can go ahead would depend on a number of factors, e.g. that the UK continues to pay to the EU budget for 2019, on the UK host organisations (in your case the university) and on whether the activities end by 31 December 2019.  You should check this directly with the university.1 https://www.gov.uk/guidance/european-temporary-leave-to-remain-in-the-ukSTUDYING AND TRAINING IN THE UK IN THE EVENT OF ﬁNO DEALﬂMarch 2019My school is taking part in a cooperation project with a UK school, withdrawal?for funding under Erasmus+. However, the Commission has presented a legislative proposal to address the situation. If that proposal is adopted You should check this with your Erasmus+ National Agency2.under the Creative Europe Programme. The project includes a UK partner. Can this project continue beyond the withdrawal date?to participate in the Creative Europe programme. However, the Commission has presented a legislative proposal to address the situation. If that proposal is adopted You should check this with the Creative Europe desk3 in your Member State.I am a researcher carrying out research in a UK research organisation However, the Commission has presented a legislative proposal to address the situation. If that proposal is adopted 4 Member State or a non-EU country that is associated to the Horizon 2020 programme. Executive Agency.placement if it takes place in the UK or if a UK organisation is involved?organisation will no longer be eligible for funding under that programme. However, the Commission has presented a legislative proposal to address the situation. If this proposal is adopted You should check this with the organisation providing the funding for your placement.2 https://ec.europa.eu/programmes/erasmus-plus/node/2105 3 https://ec.europa.eu/programmes/creative-europe/contact_en 4 © European Union, 2018 Reuse is authorised provided the source is acknowledged. The reuse policy of European Commission documents is regulated by Decision 2011/833/EU (OJ L 330, 14.12.2011, p. 39).ISBN 978-92-76-00300-7           DOI 10.2775/437815          NA-01-19-224-EN-NHOW TO PREPARE FOR BREXITCUSTOMS GUIDE FOR BUSINESSES2It is now urgent that businesses in the EU start preparing for the UK™s withdrawal, if they have not yet done so.BREXIT WILL AFFECT YOUR COMPANY IF–  – it sells goods or supplies services to the UK, or   – it buys goods or receives services from the UK, or   – it moves goods through the UK.  WHAT DOES THIS MEAN?Without a transition period (as tabled in the Withdrawal agreement) or a WTO rules, without application of preferences, as of 30 March 2019.This means in particular that:Ł Customs formalities will apply, declarations will have to be lodged and customs authorities may require guarantees for potential or existing customs debts. Ł Customs duties will apply to goods entering the EU from the United Kingdom, without preferences. February 2019In the absence of a Withdrawal Agreement, which would put in place a transition period until the end of 2020 (with the possibility of an extension foreseen in the Withdrawal agreement), the UK will be treated as a non-EU country for customs purposes as of 30 March 2019.3Ł Prohibitions or restrictions may also apply to some goods entering the EU from the United Kingdom, which means that import or export licences might be required.Ł Import and export licences issued by the United Kingdom will no longer be valid in the EU (EU27). Ł , such as customs warehousing, issued by the United Kingdom will no longer be valid in the EU (EU27). Ł Authorised Economic Operator (AEO) authorisations issued by the United Kingdom will no longer be valid in the EU (EU27) .Ł Member States will charge VAT at importation of goods entering the EU from the United Kingdom. Exports to the United Kingdom will be exempt from VAT.Ł Rules for the declaration and payment of VAT (for supplies of services such as electronic services), and for cross-border VAT refunds will change.Ł Movements of goods to the United Kingdom will require an export declaration. Movement of excise goods to the UK may also require an electronic administrative document (eAD).Ł Movements of excise goods from the United Kingdom to the EU (EU27) will have to be released from customs formalities before a movement under Excise Movement and Control System (EMCS) can begin.WHAT SHOULD YOU DO?All businesses concerned have to prepare, make all necessary decisions, and com-plete all required administrative actions, before 30 March 2019 in order to avoid disruption.Follow the checklist below and get to know which practical steps you need to take as soon as possible to be prepared.4BREXIT CHECKLIST  FOR TRADERSASSESS WHETHER YOUR BUSINESS TRADES WITH THE UK OR MOVES GOODS THROUGH THE UKIf it does:REGISTER your business with the national customs authority, to trade with non-EU countries.this list: https://europa.eu/!Xr37YVASSESS whether your business is ready to continue trading with or via the UK by having the necessary:1. human capacity2. technical capacity3. customs authorisations, such as for special procedures ENQUIRE with your national customs authority about the existing customs that are available for your business, such as:1. 2. 3. 5CONSIDER applying for an Authorised Economic Operator (AEO) status from your national customs authority.If you are registered for the VAT Mini-One-Stop-Shop in the UK, REGISTER in an EU27 Member State.If you have paid VAT in the UK in 2018, SUBMIT your VAT refund  for them to be processed before that date.TALK to your business partners (suppliers, intermediaries, carriers,–) as Brexit might also impact your supply chain.CHECK e-learning modules on Customs and Tax to see CONSULT for more detailed technical information the European a wide range of topics, including customs and taxes.6CONTACTIrelandhttp://gov.ie/Brexithttps://www.revenue.ie/brexithttps://www.prepareforbrexit.com/brexitqueries@revenue.ieMaltahttps://customs.gov.mt/bus/what-does-brexit-mean-for-my-businessMalta.customs@gov.mt        Telephone: 25685120  /  25685123  MORE INFORMATION AND RELATED LINKSŁ Withdrawal of the United Kingdom from the EUhttps://ec.europa.eu/taxation_customs/uk_withdrawal_enŁ Factsheet ﬁSeven things businesses in the EU27 need to know to  preparedness-web_en.pdfŁ https://europa.eu/!Xr37YVŁ Page with preparedness notices on all topicshttps://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness/preparedness-notices_enŁ E-learning modules on Customs and Tax       https://ec.europa.eu/taxation_customs/eu-training/general-overview_en To get additional information and assistance, contact your national authorities, your local Chamber of Commerce and Industry, or your industry association.7NOTESKP-01-19-120-EN-CPrint ISBN 978-92-79-99932-1 doi:10.2778/56399 KP-01-19-120-EN-CPDF ISBN 978-92-79-99946-8 doi:10.2778/855499 KP-01-19-120-EN-NPrinted by the Publications Office in Luxembourg