Page
of 19
Natolin, 29 March 2019

Check against delivery
Vice-Rector
Minister, Ambassadors, Students and professors, Ladies and gentlemen,
I am happy to be with you today, here in Natolin, at the heart of Poland and of Europe.
Vice-Rector, I must say that I feel indebted to your institution since several members of my team, including my deputy Sabine Weyand, graduated from the College of Europe, both from Bruges and from Natolin.
So, it is a pleasure to meet all of you, the future graduates, on this special day.
Today was long planned to be Brexit day
Page
of 19
This date, 29 March, was chosen by the UK government, when it notified its intention to leave the EU, just two years ago.
I
emerging and developed markets, we, Europeans, have strong reasons to be even more united, not divided.
But we have of course accepted the sovereign decision of the British people.  A Member State has the right to leave the Union. The Union is no prison!
The Union is not a place where countries have to stay against their will.
This is the purpose of Article 50. If there is a door to enter the Union, there should also be a door to exit. The EU must be a positive project, based on a positive political commitment. On contract rather than constraint
It is a project built by countries and peoples who chose to pursue shared dreams:   peace rather than war,   solidarity rather than isolation,   prosperity through cooperation rather than unregulated competition and
Page
of 19
It is also a project founded on shared values: human dignity, freedom, democracy, equality and, the rule of law. This is the heart of our Union, what unites us as Europeans. And the EU is a project based on law and principles, which promotes a rules-based European and international order.
Ladies and gentlemen,
choice. No spirit of revenge. No punishment. Never!
With the 27 Member States and the European Parliament, we have built ithdrawal
This was made possible by the strong unity of the 27. And I am glad that this unity remains very strong, as shown in the European Council last week and again today in my discussions with Prime Minister Mateusz Morawiecki.
This unity allowed the 27 to reach a deal with the British government  not against the British government  in November 2018. Our Withdrawal Agreement brings certainty on all the issues where Brexit creates uncertainty.   For EU citizens living in the UK  among whom there are about one million Polish citizens  and British nationals in the EU. If they decide to stay in the UK, they will keep their current rights, for the rest of their lives.
Page
of 19
For the many farmers, researchers, regions, businesses and universities in each of our countries who are carrying out projects financed by the EU budget. All commitments taken at 28 will be honoured at 28.
And for the problem created by Brexit in Ireland and Northern Ireland.
o This problem is not only about trade and customs. In order to protect peace and stability, both sides have excluded the return of a hard border.
o At the same time, as Press borders are Europes borders. Any goods arriving from Northern Ireland will be entering not just Ireland, but also Poland, France or Slovakia. Our Agreement makes sure that these goods respect EU rules, for instance for food safety, consumer protection and the prevention of animal disease.
This agreement required efforts on both sides. It represents a carefully balanced compromise.  It took two years to negotiate and it is not open for renegotiation.
future relationship, based on t, while preserving the integrity of the EU Single Market and the autonomy of the Union decision-making process.
In a joint political declaration, we agreed on a broad future relationship with a free trade area, sectorial cooperation, for instance in aviation, police and Page
of 19
judicial cooperation and cooperation in foreign policy, external security and defence. This is our common interest.
instance, we are open to work on the principle of a permanent customs union should the UK decide to take this path.
Besides, the UK will also be able to take part in EU programmes that are open to third countries, under the conditions and regulations that will be decided in the new EU budget for 2021-2027.  If the UK respects these conditions, and in particular if it pays its proper contribution, Polish students could be in a position to study in the UK
And British universities would still be eligible to engage in research projects with their European partners, under the EU programme for research and innovation.
Finally, we continue to be respectful of the democratic debate in the UK
On 15 January, the House of Commons rejected the deal that was agreed between Prime Minister May and the 27 Heads of State or Government. The UK asked for reassurances on the temporary nature of the backstop for Ireland and Northern Ireland.  We agreed to give those reassurances.
Despite the new guarantees, the House of Commons again rejected the deal on 12 March. Page
of 19
And it asked for an extension of the Article 50 period.
Last week, the European Council, under the leadership of Donald Tusk accepted this request.
A new vote will take place later today. In case of a positive vote, which would be the best outcome, the European Council agreed on a technical extension until 22 May, on the eve of the European elections.
The European Council also decided that, should there be no majority for the Withdrawal Agreement by today, the UK should indicate a way forward before 12 April.
Let me be frank: without a positive choice, the default option will be a no deal, which has become more likely. It was never our scenario, but the EU27 is now prepared.
The debates in the House of Commons continue. We are following it closely. What we now need is a positive choice to move forward.
It is the responsibility of each and every member of the House of Commons to tell us today what they want.
***
Page
of 19
Ladies and gentlemen,
For almost two years, we have managed the consequences of Brexit. But we also need to draw lessons from Brexit.  And ask ourselves why in 2016 52 % of the British people voted to leave the European Union.
I would like to share with you a few thoughts, analyses, ideas, expressing myself in a personal capacity, as an engaged citizen.
Why is Europe misunderstood and sometimes unpopular
Of course, there is the ideological view of those who argue, and will always argue, that one nation alone is better equipped to succeed in global competition than a Union of 500 million consumers and 22 million businesses.
Of course
in the 2016 referendum campaign there were some untruths
There was also a lack of information, as indeed there is in other countries. On what the European Union is, on its project, and above all on the benefits of being a member.  There was a terrible lack of debate on what would be the real consequences of leaving behind 45 years of cooperation and joint projects  we see the consequences of that today in the United Kingdom.
But that is not all. Page
of 19
There is also the feeling that Europe, its governments and institutions are not cerns.  A Europe that does not protect against the excesses of globalisation. That has for too long advocated deregulation and market fundamentalism. Without paying enough attention to the social and environmental consequences. A Europe that has not been able to fully control its external borders nor show solidarity in the face of migration crises. A Europe that has sometimes abandoned its industry and has not fully  And above all, the feeling that Europe does not hold out dreams of a better future for all Europeans
Again, this feeling is not unique to the UK. We need to listen to this feeling, understand where it comes from, and respond to it
By acknowledging that Europe has sometimes been wrong. And by rediscovering the foundations of a European project that allows each Nation, each People, each Citizen to feel protected, and part of a collective ambition
Ladies and gentlemen,
What has been, and what should be the re of the European project? The history of European integration is in fact quite simple. Page
of 19
Since the 1950s, since the Treaty of Rome, Europe has been the choice of facing the great transformations of the world and to take control of them rather than suffer from them, to be an actor rather than a own destiny.  To assert a common sovereignty, where the nation state alone is not enough. Finally, to pool resources across the continent to define common European goods. And carry out projects that are greater than all of us.  The European Coal and Steel Community, set up in 1951 after a war that had left our civilisation and our societies in ruins, allowed both the de facto the construction of a lasting peace that we have enjoyed for more than 70 years.
The common agricultural policy, launched in 1962, has allowed us together to regain food sovereignty, preserve diversity, the traceability and quality of products, and never to re-live hunger and ration books.
Cohesion policy, developed since 1988, notably under the Jacques Delors Commission, has made it possible for the most disadvantaged regions gradually to catch up as our Union has enlarged, building shared prosperity. to this.
The progress from a collection of national markets to a common marketcurrently continuing, has encouraged the growth of our businesses, especially our small and medium-sized businesses, while giving consumers more choice.
And since 1999, the single currency has facilitated trade among us and protected us against exchange-rate risk. We forget all too often that, by protecting us from American monetary hegemony, the euro is also an instrument of emancipation.
Page 10 of 19
We can be proud of all these common European goods
And we can be proud to have strengthened them over time, especially since
May 2004, almost 15 years ago, when Poland and nine other countries joined the European Union in a great moment of reunification of the European continent.  What other set of nations, what other Continent has so many collective achievements to its name? And yet, in many of our countries, political forces see the nation as the only
We need Nations, in particular to fight nationalism.  Each one has its national identity, its language, its culture, its traditions; Europe must respect them. That is what makes Europe so diverse. And at the same time we have common values that are the reason we are together. Today, once again and even more brutally than in the past, there are major global changes that we must face together. Faced with challenges such as climate change, migration, industrial and our nations alone,
If we want to meet these challenges, we must rediscover the ambition behind the construction of Europe and build new common European goods, shared by a community of 27

Page 11 of 19
Ladies and gentlemen,
At a time when, in each of our countries, thousands of young people are marching to defend the climate, is it not the role of the Union to defend it too
Climate change does not stop at national borders! It concerns us all:   Farmers are the first to suffer from floods and droughts.   City dwellers the first to suffer from poor air quality and all its effects on our health.
Faced with this challenge, building a green Europe must be a priority for the coming years. Together let us take on an ambitious goal: to make Europe the first carbon-neutral economy by 2050.
We have powerful levers at European level. We must make full use of them by applying a green priority in all our budgetary policies and through the full use of our regulatory powers.  In 2005 we set up what is today the largest carbon market in the world through the Emissions Trading System, the ETS.
We must get the CO
price right, and enforce it
including on imported emissions. The polluter pays principle should apply to all sectors.

Page 12 of 19
Ladies and gentlemen,
At the same time, this green Europe cannot be achieved at the expense of our jobs or social cohesion. Nor at the expense of our agriculture and industry, but working with them! There are a number of regions  I think of Silesia here in Poland and many others  that must be accompanied in this transition.  Industrial ambition is in fact a necessary condition for this ecological transition to succeed.
Green New Dealhe continent where we can and must achieve it.
Together we must invest massively in key technologies such as hydrogen, new-generation solar panels, green chemistry and batteries.
I read recently that 60 % of existing or planned automotive batteries are produced in China, 15 % in the US and less than 4 % in the EU.
We need to react! By using all the levers we have: taxation, green finance, and our investment capacity such as through
the European Investment Bank and if necessary a Bank for Climate
Together, we need to make our economy more circular.
Today, for seven tonnes of raw materials absorbed by the European economy, only one comes from the recycling of waste. This is not sustainable! Page 13 of 19
Let us start by launching a major plan of action against planned obsolescence, notably for mobile phones. 500 million Europeans have the critical mass to compel manufacturers to act.
Together, in the run-up to the Global Biodiversity Summit in Beijing, we must lead this battle, as we did on the climate with the Paris Agreement.  For years we have been warned about the disappearance of bees. And today we learn that one third of all insects are threatened with extinction
Our agricultural practices must continue to evolve, in the context of an open debate with our farmers about the modernisation of the Common Agricultural Policy, the development of our standards and protection against unfair competition from third countries.
On all these issues, let us never lose sight of the fact that the ecological debt we pass on to our children is at least as serious as the budgetary debt
That is why, in the same way as we have a Stability Pact for our budgets, our countries should respond to the challenges of the environment through
Sustainability Pact.
*

Page 14 of 19
Ladies and gentlemen,
At a time when China is asserting itself not just as a partner but also a also to implement a genuine industrial strategy
We are the most open continent for trade, direct investment and public procurement.
To be of real benefit to our businesses, this openness can no longer be one-way. Europe can no longer be naïve as it used to be
How can we explain that a Chinese or Indian company wins public contracts in Europe if our own companies are excluded from tendering in China or India? This is why I am pleased that the Commission put forward again in 2016 a regulation to impose reciprocity in public procurement, as I myself proposed in 2012 as Internal Market Commissioner. This proposal must now be made operational, and also more binding. The recently adopted foreign investment screening mechanism is also going in the right direction, but again, probably not far enough. Together we must strengthen th
toolbox of
That being said, ladies and gentlemen, we would be wrong to think that our successes or failures depend only on the behaviour of others. If we want a strong industry, we must first take up the challenge of our own competitiveness
Page 15 of 19
By investing together, which is still the best form of protection.
And also by addressing the fundamental issue of skills and human capital
In 2017, 43 % of Europeans lacked basic digital skills. This figure is not reassuring at a time when digital technologies are becoming the key to our competitiveness.
With artificial intelligence we are at the tipping point of a new world that will affect every aspect of our lives, from the way we work to our leisure time to our health. This is a formidable challenge. Here too, we cannot be content just to suffer from the changes that are coming
has set itself the target to train 1 % of its population in the basic concepts of artificial intelligence through public-private partnerships.
% of its population in the next three to five years? As we did with the Juncker plan, Europe should now launch a massive investment plan in digital skills Up-skilling Europe.  jobs that are at stake. And our productivity
GAFAs.
Today, the top 20 digital companies are all American or Chinese. One company alone, Amazon, invests 14 billion euros a year in research  which is more than the research and innovation programme for the whole of the EU! In Europe too, the time has come to scale up!
Finally, let us not forget the normative and ethical disruption of digital change
Through our single market, we still have the ability to impose fair competition and have standards adopted worldwide. Not only to protect our data. But also to defend our values and our democracy.  Page 16 of 19
Artificial intelligence and bio-engineering will increase the risks to our model of society and to our conception of the human. Let us not underestimate here again the need to act together.

Ladies and gentlemen,
I have talked about only two of the changes that require a collective leap forward. There are many others
At a time when the United States is withdrawing from the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty, when China is aiming to be the worlds leading military power by 2050, when Russia is gaining influence in is it not the role of the Union to do more for its defence
As President Jean-Claude Juncker often says, we cannot be content to fund 17 different systems of tanks with our national budgets, compared with the one single system in the United States. We cannot be content to have no operational EU headquarters level worthy of the name, when we know that the need for action at Union level, alongside NATO, will become ever more pressing.
Finally, faced with the challenge of migration, which is not about to disappear, is it not also Europe's role to ensure that our common external borders are under control?  Page 17 of 19
That we work together with the countries of origin on the root causes of migration, on defining legal channels and on combating trafficking.  And that in an area of freedom
without internal borders, each country takes its share of responsibility, particularly in the processing of asylum applications.
***
Ladies and gentlemen, dear students,
Whether we are talking about creating a green Europe, industrial strategy, a European defence or common responses to migration, Europe will not be built without you
graduates of the College of Europe
Even before coming to Natolin or Bruges, most of you studied abroad, thanks to the Erasmus programme, EU-funded research programmes, or simply the free movement of people in the Union.
All this probably seems natural to you. That we take it for granted is proof of what we have built together in Europe.  But let us not forget that these opportunities for exchange in a united Europe were unthinkable 30 years ago on both sides of the Iron Curtain
You are part of a generation of Europeans who live in peace. Which is free as no other generation before it. Page 18 of 19
Let us not forget that these achievements are still fragile. Sudden reversals are possible. They are even sought after by many political parties, in each of our countries.
If you want to preserve these achievements, this unique way of life in the world, take care of Europe!  Do not accept the status quo!  Share and defend your vision of Europe!  Whatever your ideas, get involved, especially in the coming debate for the European elections.  And, in your own areas of responsibility, in business, in public service, in education or in the voluntary sector, keep on getting involved and defending what you believe in
A few weeks ago on a train I met Mark, a British professor working in Amsterdam on European space policy. He summarised his regret about Brexit in one sentence. Eight words of dreams and regrets: Only together can we explore the solar system
What is true for the solar system is also true for climate change, the challenge of data, defence and the fight against poverty.  We all have our regrets and our dreams
. All I know is that each and every one of us has a role to play in maintaining the European dream. Page 19 of 19
As 27 nations we can and must launch new visionary projects for your generation and those to come.
What we do not do for Europe, nobody will do in our place.
Thank you for your attention.  Page
of 12
Speech by Michel Barnier at the EPC Breakfast Brussels,
April 2019

Check against delivery
Good morning ladies and gentlemen,
You have entitled this breakfast discussion
already have an agreement

It was concluded by Theresa May and the European Council on 25 November last year, both on the terms of the withdrawal and on the framework for the future relationship
The EU put a lot of effort into concluding that agreement.
We .  We tried to make sure that the UK could leave the EU in an orderly manner on 29 March, just as the UK had foreseen. Page
of 12
And, if the UK still wants to leave in an orderly fashion, this agreement is the best and only one possible.
However,
e package that we agreed is still being debated in the UK and the House of Commons. There were a number of important votes again last night
And the debate continue
Last Friday, 29 March, the House of Commons voted on the Withdrawal Agreement
separate from the political declaration
A majority of MPs voted against it
Some MPs have stated that they agree with the Withdrawal Agreement, but they cannot vote in favour of it, in the absence of a closer economic relationship
The House of Commons also consistently rejected leaving the EU without an agreement
However
the only way to avoid a
-deal Brexit is through a positive majority
We should continue to make this point in the public debate.
Ladies and gentlemen,
Since there was no positive majority for the Withdrawal Agreement before 29 March, the Article 50 period has been extended until 12 April
Page
of 12
The European Council was clear: the UK should now, more than ever, indicate a way forward
I see three possible situations in advance of the European Council called by President Tusk on 10 April:
1/ First, there is the possibility of a successful meaningful vote in the coming days
The House of Commons did not manage to find a majority, again, last night in its second round of indicative votes.  We will continue to follow how the process unfolds in the UK. On our side, we have always said that we can accept a Customs Union, or a relationship similar to the Norway model
In fact, the Political Declaration as it is today can accommodate all of these options already.  It leaves the door open for a variety of outcomes
But if the UK so wishes, w
are ready to rework the Political Declaration, as long as the fundamental principles of the EU are respected.
In any case, should the House of Commons vote in favour of the Withdrawal Agreement, this would not be the end of the process in the UK, which would still have to formally ratify the Agreement.
Page
of 12
I would expect that the European Council would not have too many difficulties in agreeing on a short extension for this process to take place. This is up to the EU leaders; it is not my decision.
On our side, the European Parliament also needs to ratify the Withdrawal Agreement. That is a necessary but also sufficient condition for the orderly withdrawal of the UK.
* Ladies and gentlemen,
If the UK Parliament does not vote in favour of the Withdrawal Agreement in the coming days, only two options would remain: leaving without an agreement or requesting a longer extension of the Article 50 period.
It would be the responsibility of the UK government to choose between these options.
2/ No deal was never our desired or intended scenario, but day by day it is becoming more likely. The EU27 is now prepared
Since December 2017, the Commission has reached out to all economic sectors and stakeholders. In particular, we have published 90 notices to help all businesses and stakeholders prepare, in all sectors.
We have also worked with the Member States, and the Commission just completed a tour of the 27 to make sure that no question is left unanswered. Page
of 12
National administrations recruited new customs officials.
They created new Border Inspection Posts for sanitary and phyto-sanitary checks.
They granted new licenses to financial services.
At EU level, we have tabled 19 legislative proposals. 17 have been approved.  The Union will be ready to manage any disruption for the public and businesses in the EU27.  All these measures are temporary, limited in scope and adopted unilaterally by the European Union.
The aim of these measures is to protect European interests, not to negotiate mini-deals with the United Kingdom.
For example, in order to avoid major disruption in aviation, the EU adopted a regulation allowing certain air services between the UK and the European Union
for a period of 12 months
and on the condition of reciprocity. This proposal ensures basic connectivity.
Another example: we also have now an approved EU regulation on protecting social security rights acquired before the withdrawal date.
Only two measures are still pending, on the 2019 budget, and on exempting British nationals from the requirement of having short-term visas.
Page
of 12
Not everything will be smooth. There will be problems. Being prepared means that all unforeseen problems should be manageable on the EU side

3/ Finally, the UK may ask for another extension
Such an extension would carry significant risks for the EU
Therefore,
strong justification would be needed
Many businesses in the EU warn us against the cost of extending uncertainty
There would also be a political cost
In any case, if the UK is still a Member State on 23 May, it will have to organise the European elections. It will have to nominate a Member for the next European Commission.
The UK would
At the same time, it would prepare its own future, for instance on global trade, on British agriculture, on financial services, to name but a few. Page
of 12

long extension cpose a risk for our decision-making autonomy

Ladies and gentlemen,
Over the last days and weeks, the no-deal scenario has become more likely. But we can still hope to avoid it.
Our objective remains to ensure an orderly withdrawal, which will create the trust we need to build an ambitious future relationship
In our
olitical Declaration, we agreed on a broad future relationship with a free trade area, sectorial cooperation  for instance in aviation , police and judicial cooperation and cooperation in foreign policy, external security and defence.
In an unstable world, marked with new challenges and geopolitical tensions, close cooperation is in our common interest
***
Page
of 12
Ladies and gentlemen,
If we achieve this objective, we would have succeeded in managing the negative consequences of Brexit.
But we also need to draw lessons from Brexit.
It is a question I tried to answer in some more detail in a speech at the College of Europe in Natolin last Friday.
We must indeed ask ourselves why in 2016
52 % of the British people voted to leave the European Union
Why so many of the younger generations who are pro-Europeans did not come out to vote? And why Europe was misunderstood and unpopular with an overall majority
Of course, there is the ideological view of those who argue, and will always argue, that one nation alone is better equipped to succeed in global competition than a Union of 500 million consumers and 22 million businesses.
Of course, in the 2016 referendum campaign there was misinformation
There was also a terrible lack of debate on the consequences of leaving behind 45 years of cooperation and joint projects; we see the consequences of that today in the UK
There were people who attacked core achievements of the EU, such as free movement of people and EU citizenship. Page
of 12
But that is not all.
There is also the feeling that Europe, its governments and institutions are not responding to legitimate concerns.   A Europe that does not prepare for, and protect against
the excesses of globalisation. That has for too long advocated economic freedoms without paying enough attention to the social and environmental consequences.
A Europe that has not been able to fully control its external borders nor stand united in the face of migration and refugee crises.
A Europe where we have often abandoned jobs and industries without creating the conditions for new ones.
And above all, the feeling that Europe does not respond to the dreams of Europeans or promise them a better future
This view is not unique to the UK.
We need to listen, understand where it comes from, and respond
Acknowledg
that Europe has sometimes been wrong.
ediscover a Europe that allows each nation, people, and citizen to feel protected and part of a collective ambition
Ladies and gentlemen,
Page 10 of 12
The history of the European project, of where it has been successful, is in fact quite simple. It is the story of when Europe chose to be an actor rather than a spectator of the great, often brutal transformations of the world.  It is when we have chosen to assert a common sovereignty where the nation state alone is not enough. It is where we have pooled resources across the continent to deliver on common European goods
Think back!  The European coal and steel community in 1951 consolidated peace and rebuilt our industry
The Common Agricultural Policy, launched in 1962, helped regain food sovereignty and never relive hunger and ration books.
Our cohesion policy, developed since 1988 brought new Member States into the fold with the promise of solidarity and shared prosperity. The reunification of our divided continent is one of our greatest achievements.
The Single Market launched in 1993 enlarged markets beyond national markets and developed this shared prosperity.
And since 1999, the single currency has facilitated trade and is also becoming an instrument of European sovereignty.
beginning, lies a set of shared values: human dignity, freedom, democracy, equality and the rule of law.  Page 11 of 12
This is the heart of our Union, what unites us as Europeans
We must be proud of all these achievements
But also realise, that today, perhaps even more brutally than in the past, we are facing major global challenges on which we must act together
Climate change, migration, industrial and technological disruptions, and terrorism are seismic challenges on which Member States cannot deliver alone. Our Union must be an evolving project.
We must be ready to deliver on new European common goods
A Green Europe, with the objective to become the first carbon-neutral economy by 2050, making our economy more circular and leading the battle i
protecting biodiversity.
A modern industrial strategy to show that Europe is open but not naïve, ready to invest in digital and artificial intelligence, capable of addressing the fundamental challenges of skills and human capital.
European defence, pooling our capabilities, as proposed by President Jean-Claude Juncker, and reinforcing our operational capacity to act together at home, in our neighbourhood and beyond.
An ambitious migration policy
to take control of migration flows coming to Europe, combining the protection of our external borders, the fight against trafficking, the definition of legal avenues and common responsibilities on asylum.
Page 12 of
These are just some examples of what we must now do at 27
Building on the unity acquired during the Brexit negotiations. In reality, today is no time for regrets. The world is fast outpacing Europe. Europe cannot remain obsessed by the past, when the rest of the world is looking to the future. What we do not do for Europe, nobody will do in our place.
Thank you for your attention.
---