UK WITHDRAWAL BUSINESS EXPORT SCENARIOS

EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL TAXATION AND CUSTOMS UNION


Contents I. General Information ........................................................................................................................
II. Scenarios .........................................................................................................................................
1. Union goods exported from the EU27 exiting via OoExt in the UK...........................................
2. Union goods exported from the EU27 via the UK to OoExt in the EU27 ..................................
3. Goods exported from the UK to OoExt in the EU27 ..................................................................


2
I. General Information This document complements the Guidance note on Withdrawal of the United Kingdom and customs related matters in case of no-deal, and covers the main export business scenarios. Definition of the No Deal + CTC scenario As of 30 March 2019, 00:00 CET  A clear cut-off; as of the withdrawal date on 30 March 2019 (00:00 CET), the UK is disconnected from all EU IT systems, including for operations that have started before the withdrawal date.   On the withdrawal date at 00:00 CET, the UK will accede to the Convention on a common transit procedure and to the Convention on the simplification of formalities in trade in goods.
Abbreviations ActOoExt Actual Office of Exit CTC Convention on a common transit procedure DeclOoExt Declared Office of Exit ECS Export Control System EXS Exit Summary Declaration (pre-departure) ENS Entry Summary Declaration (pre-arrival) OoExp Office of Export OoExt Office of Exit

II. Scenarios  1.
nion goods exported from the EU27 exiting via OoExt in the UK
Export PL
Exit UK a) UK withdrawal when goods are in the EU27 territory b) UK withdrawal when goods are in the UK territory Sub Scenario a):  UK withdrawal  when goods are in the EU27 territory  Presentation of the goods should be done at an OoExt within the
ustoms territory of the Union (diversion
ActOoExt confirms the physical exit of the goods, then the goods can exit the EU  Continuation of movement within the UK under a UK procedure
Remark: As the UK becomes a Contracting Party to the CTC as of the withdrawal date, the goods may be then placed under a transit procedure as of that date, preferably already at an inland customs office in the EU27. That office would then take over the function of the ActOoExt.
Sub Scenario b):  UK withdrawal  when goods are in the UK
o rules for the exit of the goods applied
The goods will be exited under the UK rules
The UK will not be able to send any messages via ECS confirming the physical exit of the goods
he OoExp close
the export movement in ECS based on an alternative proof
2. Union goods exported from the EU27 via the UK to OoExt in the EU27
Export IE Exit NL a) UK withdrawal when goods are in the EU27 territory b) UK withdrawal when goods are in the UK territory c) UK withdrawal after goods have re-entered the EU2
territory Sub Scenario a):  UK withdrawal  when goods are in the EU27 territory  Presentation of the goods should be done at an OoExt within the customs territory of the Union (diversion)  An ENS shall be lodged at the customs office of first entry in the EU27
Following the re-entry to the EU27, to reach the OoExt point of exit from where the goods finally leave the EU customs territory, the goods have to be placed under external transit procedure or any other special procedure allowing for the movement of goods or move in temporary storage depending on the customs rules applicable to the actual mode of transport  A re-export notification, a re-export declaration or an EXS at the EU27 OoExt should be lodged
Remark: As the UK becomes a Contracting Party to the CTC as of the withdrawal date, the goods may then be placed under a transit procedure already in the EU27 territory as of that date (export followed by transit) and move via the UK to the point of exit in the EU27 from where the goods will finally physically leave the EU customs territory
Sub Scenario b):  UK withdrawal  when goods are in the UK territory  As of the withdrawal date, the goods lose their Union status  An ENS shall be lodged at the customs office of first entry in the EU27   Following the re-entry to the EU27, to reach the OoExt point of exit from where the goods leave the EU customs territory, the goods have to be placed under external transit procedure or any other special procedure allowing for the movement of goods or move in temporary storage depending on the customs rules applicable to the actual mode of transport  A re-export notification, a re-export declaration or an EXS at the EU27 OoExt should be lodged  The OoExp closes the export movement in ECS based on an alternative proof
6
Remark: As the UK becomes a Contracting Party to the CTC as of the withdrawal date, a T1 transit procedure may be started in NCTS as of that date from the UK to the external EU27 border where the goods will leave the EU customs territory. Sub Scenario c):  UK withdrawal  after goods have re-entered the EU27 territory  NL can exit the good
as declared

3.
oods exported from the UK to OoExt in the EU27
Export UK
Exit DE a) UK withdrawal when goods are in the UK territory b) UK withdrawal when goods are in the EU27 territory Sub Scenario a):  UK withdrawal  when goods are in the UK territory  Goods are subject to UK customs procedures when exiting the UK
s of the withdrawal date, the goods lose their Union status  An ENS shall be lodged at the customs office of first entry in the EU27   To reach the point of exit from where the goods leave the EU customs territory, the goods have to be placed under external transit procedure or any other special procedure allowing for the movement of goods or move in temporary storage depending on the customs rules applicable to the actual mode of transport   A re-export notification, a re-export declaration or an EXS at the EU27 OoExt should be lodge

Remark: As the UK becomes a Contracting Party to the CTC as of the withdrawal date, a T1 transit procedure can be started in NCTS as of that date from the UK to the external EU27 border where goods will leave the EU customs territory
8
Sub Scenario b):  UK withdrawal  when goods are in the EU27 territory  OoExt can exit the goods in its ECS application but will not be able to confirm the physical exit of the goods to the UK OoExp electronically
as the UK will be disconnected from the ECS as of the withdrawal date  OoExt should, upon request from the economic operator, issue a proof of exit

UK WITHDRAWAL BUSINESS TRANSIT SCENARIOS
EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL TAXATION AND CUSTOMS UNION

AND THE UNITED KINGDOM ACCEDES TO THE CONVENTION ON A COMMON TRANSIT PROCEDURE AND TO THE CONVENTION ON THE SIMPLIFICATION OF FORMALITIES IN TRADE IN GOODS

Contents I. General Information ........................................................................................................................
II. Scenarios  Destination UK ............................................................................................................
1. External Union Transit Procedure (T1)  Non-Union goods from PL via EU27 to the UK .......
2. Common Transit Procedure (T1)  Non-Union goods from TR via EU27+CTC to the UK,  International Union Transit Procedure (T2)  Union goods from TR via EU27+CTC to the UK ......
III. Scenarios  Departure UK ...........................................................................................................
1. External Union Transit Procedure (T1)  Non-Union goods from the UK via EU27 to PL .......
2. Common Transit Procedure (T1)  Non-Union goods from the UK via EU27 + CTC to TR, Internal Union Transit Procedure (T2)  Union goods from the UK via EU27 +CTC to TR .............
IV. Scenarios  Crossing the UK ..................................................................................................... 11 1. External Union Transit Procedure (T1)
Non-Union goods from IE via the UK to FR ........... 11 2. External Union Transit Procedure (T1)
Non-Union goods from IT via CH-FR-UK to IE,  Common Transit Procedure (T2)  Union goods from FR via CH-FR-UK to IE ............................. 13 V. Enquiry & Recovery procedure ..................................................................................................... 16


I. General Information
This document complements the Guidance note on Withdrawal of the United Kingdom and customs related matters in case of no-deal, and covers the main transit business scenarios. Definition of the No Deal + CTC scenario As of 30 March 2019, 00:00 CET  A clear cut
ff; as of the withdrawal date on 30 March 2019 (00:00 CET), the UK is disconnected from all EU IT systems, including for operations that have started before the withdrawal date.   On the withdrawal date at 00:00 CET, the UK will accede to the Convention on a common transit procedure and to the Convention on the simplification of formalities in trade in goods. Entry summary declaration  Exit summary declaration When a transit movement is launched before the withdrawal date, the safety and security data is not necessarily already included in the transit declaration. In some of the scenarios in this document, it will not even be necessary to lodge those data. For example in case of scenario 1.b) external transit between EU27 and the UK: the safety and security data is not included in the declaration, because the movement is initiated between EU Member States before the withdrawal date; then, the transit movement will already be in the UK when it becomes a CTC Contracting Party on its own as of the withdrawal date, so lodging the EXS is not applicable any longer
The ENS/EXS becomes mandatory when the transit movement arrives at the border of the EU27 after the withdrawal date, it is necessary to submit it then separately. The ENS/EXS should be lodged as soon as the trader notices that the truck will not pass the EU27/UK border before the withdrawal date
Nevertheless, the ENS/EXS can be combined with the transit declaration as it is currently the case.  Abbreviations CO Customs Office CTC Convention on a common transit procedure EXS Exit Summary Declaration (pre-departure) ENS Entry Summar
Declaration (pre-arrival) NCTS New Computerised Transit System OoDep Office of Departure OoDes Office of Destination OoTRA Office of Transit

II. Scenarios  Destination UK 1. External Union Transit Procedure (T1)  Non
nion goods from PL via EU27 to the UK
Departure PL
Destination UK a) UK withdrawal when goods are in the EU territory b) UK withdrawal when goods are in the UK territory Sub Scenario a):  UK withdrawal  when goods are in EU27 territory  The movement can continue as a T1 procedure in NCTS  At the external EU27 border (Example FR/UK) an EXS has to be lodged
On the UK side, an OoTRA has to be passed  This additional OoTRA has to request the relevant data with the IE114 at the OoDep and fulfils all the regular duties of that CO role
4
Sub Scenario b):  UK withdrawal  when goods are in the UK  The movement can continue as a T1 procedure in NCTS 2. Common Transit Procedure (T1)  Non
nion goods from TR via EU27+CTC to the UK,  International Union Transit Procedure (T2)  Union goods from TR via EU27+CTC to the UK
Departure TR
Destination UK a) UK withdrawal when goods are in the EU territory b) UK withdrawal when goods are in the UK territory c) UK withdrawal when goods are in a CTC country Sub Scenario a):  UK withdrawal  when goods are in EU27 territory (Example in DE)  The movement can continue as a T1/T2 procedure in NCTS  At the external EU27 border (Example BE/UK) an EXS has to be lodged, if not already combined with the transit declaration  On the UK side, an OoTRA has to be passed  This additional OoTRA has to request the relevant data with the IE114 at the OoDep and fulfils all the regular duties of that CO role

Sub Scenario b):  UK withdrawal  when goods are in the UK  The movement can continue as a T1/T2 procedure in NCTS
Sub Scenario c):  UK withdrawal  when goods are in a CTC Country (Example in RS
The movement can continue as a T1/T2 procedure in NCTS  At the external EU27 border (Example BE/UK) an EXS has to be lodged, if not already combined with the transit declaration   On the UK side, an OoTRA has to be passed  This additional OoTRA has to request the relevant data with the IE114 at the OoDep and fulfils all the regular duties of that CO role



III. Scenarios  Departure UK 1. External Union Transit Procedure (T1)  Non
nion goods from the UK via EU27 to PL
Departure UK
Destination PL a) UK withdrawal when goods are in the EU territory b) UK withdrawal when goods are in the UK territory Sub Scenario a):  UK withdrawal when goods are in EU territory (Example BE)   The movement can continue as a T1 procedure in NCTS Sub Scenario b):  UK withdrawal  when goods are in the UK  The movement can continue as a T1 procedure in NCTS  At the external EU27 border (Example UK/FR) an ENS has to be lodged   On the EU27 side, an OoTRA has to be passed  This additional OoTRA has to request the relevant data with the IE114 at the OoDep and fulfils all the regular duties of that CO role

2. Common Transit Procedure (T1)  Non
nion goods from the UK via EU27 + CTC to TR, Internal Union Transit Procedure (T2)  Union goods from the UK via EU27 +CTC to TR
Departure UK
Destination TR a) UK withdrawal when goods are in the EU territory b) UK withdrawal when goods are in the UK territory c) UK withdrawal when goods are in
CTC Country

Sub Scenario a):  UK withdrawal  when goods are in the EU territory (Example DE)   The movement can continue as a T1/T2 procedure in NCTS
Sub Scenario b):  UK withdrawal  when goods are in the UK  The movement can continue as a T1/T2 procedure in NCTS  At the external EU27 border (Example UK/BE) an ENS has to be lodged, if not already combined with the transit declaration  On the EU27 side, an OoTRA has to be passed  This additional OoTRA has to request the relevant data with the IE114 at the OoDep and fulfils all the regular duties of that CO role

10
Sub Scenario c):  UK withdrawal  when goods are in a CTC country (Example RS
The movement can continue as a T1/T2 procedure in NCTS

11
IV. Scenarios  Crossing the UK 1. External Union Transit Procedure (T1)
Non-Union goods from IE via the UK to FR
Departure IE
Destination FR a) UK withdrawal when goods are in the EU territory b) UK withdrawal when goods are in the UK territory c) UK withdrawal when goods are in the IE territory Sub Scenario a):  UK withdrawal  when goods are in the EU territory after crossing (Example FR)   The movement can continue as a T1 procedure in NCTS Sub Scenario b):  UK withdrawal  when goods are in the UK  The movement can continue as a T1 procedure in NCTS  At the external EU27 border (Example UK/FR) an ENS has to be lodged  On the EU27 side, an OoTRA has to be passed  This additional OoTRA has to request the relevant data with the IE114 at the OoDep and fulfils all the regular duties of that CO role 12
Sub Scenario c):  UK withdrawal  when goods are still in Ireland   The movement can continue as a T1 procedure in NCTS  At the EU27 border before leaving the EU (Example IE/UK), an EXS has to be lodged  At the EU27 border before entering the EU (Example UK/FR) an ENS has to be lodged  On the UK and EU27 side, an OoTRA has to be passed  Th
e additional OoTRA have to request the relevant data with the IE114 at the OoDep and fulfil all the regular duties of that CO role
13
2. External Union Transit Procedure (T1)
Non-Union goods from IT via CH-FR-UK to IE,
Common Transit Procedure (T2)  Union goods from IT via CH-FR-UK to IE
Departure I
Destination IE a) UK withdrawal when goods are in the EU territory b) UK withdrawal when goods are in the CTC country c) UK withdrawal when goods are in the UK territory d) UK withdrawal when goods are in the IE territory Sub Scenario a):  UK withdrawal  when goods are in the EU territory (Example FR)   The movement can continue as a T1/T2 procedure in NCTS  At the EU27 border before leaving the EU (Example FR/UK), an EXS has to be lodged  At the EU27 border before entering the EU (Example UK/IE) an ENS has to be lodged
n the UK and in IE an OoTRA has to be passed  Th
e additional OoTRA have to request the relevant data with the IE114 at the OoDep and fulfil all the regular duties of that CO role
14
Sub Scenario b):  UK withdrawal  when goods are in a CTC Country (Example CH)   The movement can continue as a T1/T2 procedure in NCTS  At the EU27 border before leaving the EU (Example FR/UK), an EXS has to be lodged  At the EU27 border before entering the EU (Example UK/IE) an ENS has to be lodged
n the UK and in IE an OoTRA has to be passed  Th
e additional OoTRA have to request the relevant data with the IE114 at the OoDep and fulfil all the regular duties of that CO role
Sub Scenario c):  UK withdrawal  when goods are in the UK   The movement can continue as a T1/T2 procedure in NCTS  At the external EU27 border (Example UK/IE) an ENS has to be lodged  In IE an OoTRA has to be passed  This additional OoTRA has to request the relevant data with the IE114 at the OoDep and fulfils all the regular duties of that CO role
15
Sub Scenario d):  UK withdrawal  when goods are in Ireland   The movement can continue as a T1/T2 procedure in NCTS

16
V. Enquiry & Recovery procedure  Enquiry procedure After UK becoming a CTC country, the enquiry procedure can be handled as described in the system specifications and in the Transit manual.  Recovery procedure After UK becoming a CTC country, the recovery procedure can be handled as described in the system specifications and in the Transit manual.


EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL TAXATION AND CUSTOMS UNION
Brussels, 11 March 2019
UIDANCE NOTE
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND CUSTOMS RELATED MATTERS  IN CASE OF NO DEAL The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. This means
the United Kingdom will
This guidance note addresses a situation where the UK becomes a third country on the withdrawal date without a withdrawal agreement and hence without a transition period provided for in the draft Withdrawal Agreement.
As of the withdrawal date, the Union rules in the field of customs no longer apply to the UK. The UK will be treated as any other third country with which the EU does not have any preferential trade relationship or customs or other agreements or arrangements
Preferences shall not be granted either to goods originating in the Overseas Countries and Territories which have special relations with the UK and are listed in Annex II of the TFEU (UK OCTs).
As of that date, appropriate rules in the field of customs, including the common customs tariff, and EU commercial policy measures will apply to the UK.  Furthermore, the UK will no longer have access to the EU customs IT systems.
In accordance with Article 50(3) of the Treaty on European Union, the European Council, in agreement with the United Kingdom, may unanimously decide that the Treaties cease to apply at a later date.
A third country is a country not member of the EU.
Cf. Part four of the Agreement on the withdrawal of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland from the European Union and the European Atomic Energy Community (OJ, C 66 I, 19.2.2019, p.
.
4
The UK OCTs listed in Annex II of the TFEU are: Anguilla, Cayman Islands, Falkland Islands, South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands, Montserrat, Pitcairn, Saint Helena and Dependencies, British Antarctic Territory, British Indian Ocean Territory, Turks and Caicos Islands, British Virgin Islands and Bermuda.
2
This guidance note aims to give guidance on the consequences for customs processes as of the withdrawal date
and should be read in conjunction with the Guidance note on excise issues.
1.
CONOMIC OPERATOR REGISTRATION IDENTIFICATION (EORI
a) Following the withdrawal of the UK the trade patterns of persons, established in the Union, who currently carr
out transaction
only with economic operators or other persons in the UK might change. While they are currently not involved in trade with third countries but only in intra-Union transactions, and hence have not been assigned an EORI number by any MS, they will carry out transactions requiring customs formalities. This requires, according to UCC
legislation, them to register with customs authorities in the Member State where they are established
Nothing prevents those economic operators to submit the required data or undertake the necessary steps for the registration (Annex 12-01 UCC DA8) already in advance of the withdrawal date
b) Two categories of persons currently established in the UK or registered with a UK EORI number need to be distinguished
Persons who are currently not involved in trade with third countries but only in intra-Union transactions
and who hence have not been assigned an EORI number by any MS, but as of the withdrawal date intend to carry out transactions requiring customs formalities, which, according to UCC legislation, requires them to be registered with customs authorities in the Union.   Economic operators and other persons, including third country operators, who have a currently valid EORI number assigned by the UK customs authority which will be invalid in the EU27 as of the withdrawal date
In this case, economic operators must be aware of the fact that they have to register with the competent customs authorit
in the EU27 and to use the new EORI number when applying for a customs decision after the withdrawal. Following the withdrawal, economic operators established in the UK or in another third country, have to register according to Article 9(2) UCC with the competent customs authority in a Member State. Economic operators that have a permanent business establishment in a Member State as defined in Article 5(32) UCC have to register with the customs authorities in the Member State where the permanent
This guidance note further complements the "Notices to stakeholders" published by the Commission services in the area of EU customs law (https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness/preparedness-notices_en#tradetaxud).
See https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness/preparedness-notices_en#tradetaxud.
Regulation (EU) No 952/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 9 October 2013 laying down the Union Customs Code
OJ L 269, 10.10.2013, p. 1).
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2015/2446 of 28 July 2015 supplementing Regulation (EU) No 952/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council as regards detailed rules concerning certain provisions of the Union Customs Code (OJ L 343, 29.12.2015, p. 1).
3
business establishment is situated. Economic operators that do not have a permanent business establishment in a Member State have to register in the Member State responsible for the place where they first lodge a declaration or apply for a decision; in addition, those economic operators need to appoint a fiscal representative, where required by current legislation
Nothing prevents also those economic operators to submit the required data or undertake the necessary steps for the registration (Annex 12-01 UCC DA) already in advance of the withdrawal date. Customs authorities of the Member States should accept requests already before the withdrawal date and assign to them EORI numbers with the withdrawal date as the starting date "YYYYMMDD
or thereafter, according to the requests of the persons concerned. 2.
USTOMS DECISIONS  2.1 Authorisations  The impact of the UK withdrawal on authorisations depends on the type of authorisation including the issuing customs authority, the holder of the authorisation and the geographical coverage.  Authorisations granted by UK customs authorities As a rule, any authorisation already granted by UK customs authorities are no longer valid in the EU27 as of the withdrawal date. The customs authorities of the UK are no longer an EUcompetent customs authority as of that date.
hen the UK accedes to the Convention on a common transit procedure
(CTC) as a Contracting Party in its own right as of the withdrawal date
authorisations granted by the UK for transit simplifications10 will no longer be valid in the EU27 Customs Decisions system, but need to be treated in the UK's national system as a Contracting Party to the CTC.  Authorisations granted by the EU27 customs authorities In general, authorisations granted by an EU27 customs authority will remain valid but need to be amended by the customs authority on their own initiative or following an application to amend from the economic operator in view of the geographical coverage or elements of the authorisation related to the UK and be amended as appropriate.11 However, authorisations granted to economic operators with UK EORI numbers are no longer valid in the EU27 as of the withdrawal date, unless the
OJ L 226, 13.8.1987, p. 2, as last amended by Decision 1/2017, OJ L 8, 12.1.2018, p 1. 10
Authorisations for comprehensive guarantee including waiver and authorisation
to use the electronic transport document (ETD) as a transit declaration for goods carried by air as authorisations with a link to the EU27
The use of the comprehensive guarantee requires a recalculation of the reference amount due to the changes of the customs status of the goods to be covered under common transit. 11
See Article 23(4)(a) UCC, Article 15 UCC DA.
4
economic operat
is established in the EU27, has the possibility to obtain an EU27 EORI and to apply for an amendment of the authorisation to include the new EU27 EORI instead of the UK EORI number. In order to facilitate the preparation by the stakeholders, it is also possible for the customs authority to amend authorisation
without a prior application. Th
authorisations granted to economic operators with EU27 EORI numbers, which are currently also valid in the UK need to be amended in order to take account of the withdrawal and the corresponding geographical coverage, e.g. in the authorisation concerning the Regular Shipping Service, the routes containing UK ports will have to be deleted.
Single Authorisation for Simplified Procedures (SASP) which today cover
the UK and a single MS will no longer be valid as of the withdrawal date. Nonetheless, it might be amended and could become a national authorisation
Where a SASP authorisation covers the UK and more than one EU27 Member State, that authorisation remains valid, but needs to be amended. In case the SASP authorisation covers simplified declarations, it should be noted that the economic operator needs to submit the supplementary declaration covering also the UK only for the period until the da
before the withdrawal date; a separate supplementary declaration covering the remaining Member States only has to be made for any remaining days of that calendar month
Authorisations to use the comprehensive guarantee where the guarantor is established in the UK will be suspended until the economic operator has replaced the UK guarantor by a guarantor established in the EU27
The use of the comprehensive guarantee requires a recalculation of the reference amount due to the changes of the customs status of the goods to be covered under common transit. Economic operators who currently do not require authorisations but whose situation will change as of the withdrawal date need to apply for the relevant authorisation. Operators who are currently holder
of authorisations granted by UK customs authorities and who draw the conclusion that they will meet the UCC requirements after the withdrawal need to apply for the relevant authorisations to the
27 customs authorities. The applications may already be submitted in advance of the withdrawal date to allow the competent customs authority to prepare taking the decision. In any case, the decision shall only take effect as of the withdrawal date at the earliest. This applies also to economic operators who are currently registered with a UK EORI, and have an EU27 Member State EORI number with a future starting date. In their case, however, the Customs Decision System (CDS) does not accept an EORI number, which will become valid only in the future, while it allows for a future validity date of the authorisation. Consequently, applications for authorisations, which are covered by CDS12 and submitted by those economic operators
have to be dealt with outside CDS. As of the withdrawal date, when the EORI becomes valid, the authorisation should be entered into the system.                                                            12 See Article 5 of Implementing Regulation 2017/2089, OJ L 297, 15.11.2017, p. 13.
5
2.2
ecision
relating to binding tariff information
BTI decisions
A decision relating to binding tariff information
BTI decision
is an official written decision issued by a customs authority which provides the applicant with an assessment of the classification of goods in the EU tariff nomenclature prior to an import or export procedure. The BTI decision is binding on all the EU customs authorities and the holder of the decision. The BTI decisions already issued by the customs authorities of the UK will no longer be valid in the EU27 as of the withdrawal date.  Any BTI applications submitted to the customs authorities of the UK or applications by or on behalf of persons holding a UK's EORI number made to the customs authorities of other Member States before the withdrawal date, but not processed before that date, shall not result in BTI decisions as of the withdrawal date.  The BTI decisions issued by the customs authorities of the EU27 Member States to holders with UK EORI numbers will no longer be valid as of the withdrawal date as the EORI numbers will no longer be valid in the customs territory of the Union and as BTI decisions may not be amended (Article 34(6) UCC). This will be reflected automatically in the EBTI-3 system. Those BTI decision holders shall register with the customs authorities in accordance with Article 9(2) and (3) UCC and Article 6 UCC DA to obtain a valid EORI number before applying for a new BTI decision in the EU27. The applicant could request a reissuing of his previous BTI decision by including a reference thereto in the application form.  2.3
ecision
relating to binding origin information
BOI decisions
A decision relating to binding origin information (BOI decision) is a written decision by a customs authority taken upon application, which provides its holder with a determination of the origin of goods prior to an import or export procedure. The BOI decision is binding on all the customs authorities in the EU and on the holder of the decision. The BOI decisions already issued by the customs authorities of the UK will no longer be valid in the EU27 as of the withdrawal date.  Any applications for BOI decisions submitted to the customs authorities of the UK or applications by or on behalf of persons holding a UK's EORI number made to the customs authorities of other Member States before the withdrawal date, but not processed before that date, shall not result in BOI decisions as of the withdrawal date.  In addition, with a view to taking BOI decisions as of the withdrawal date, the customs authorities of the EU27 shall not consider UK inputs (materials or processing operations) as having an 'EU origin' (for non-preferential purpose) or being of goods incorporating those inputs. The BOI decisions issued by the customs authorities of the EU27 to holders with UK EORI numbers will no longer be valid as of the withdrawal date, as the EORI numbers will no longer be valid in the customs territory of the Union insofar as BOI decisions
may not be amended (Article 34(6) UCC). Those BOI decision holders have the possibility to register with the customs authorities to obtain a valid EORI number before applying for a new BOI decision in the EU27. BOIs issued before the withdrawal date referred to goods including UK inputs (materials or processing operations) which were determinant for the acquisition of origin will no longer be valid as of the withdrawal date
3.
AGGAGE TAGS A baggage tag as set out in Annex 12-03 UCC IA may be affixed on hold baggage, which is scheduled to leave the UK with an aircraft before the withdrawal date, but arrives at an EU27 airport as of that date.  4.
ARIFF QUOTAS 4.1 First come-first served tariff quotas
equests by operators to benefit from Union tariff quotas according to the UCC which are based on declarations that have been accepted prior to the withdrawal date are eligible where the required supporting documents have been provided to the UK customs authorities prior to that date. Declarations accepted by the UK customs authorities as of the withdrawal date are not eligible to benefit from Union tariff quotas. Where the UK customs authorities have transmitted valid requests to the Commission without delay, the Commission will allocate quantities according to Article 51(2) UCC IA13 and will communicate the amounts allocated to the UK thereafter. 4.2 Tariff quotas managed by licences For licence-managed Union tariff quotas, the rights and obligations that arise from UK agricultural licences allocated by the licensing issuing authorities of the UK as well as those that were transferred to operators established in the UK will cease to be valid in the EU27 as of the withdrawal date. As of that date, EU27 customs administrations shall not any longer accept those licences.  Licences issued by EU27 licensing authorities will remain valid within the EU27, unless transferred to operators established in the UK. 5.
REFERENTIAL ORIGIN14 ASPECTS As of the withdrawal date the UK becomes a third country to which the EU preferential trade arrangements with third countries cease to apply.                                                            13
Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2015/2447
f 24 November 2015 laying down detailed rules for implementing certain provisions of Regulation (EU) No 952/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council laying down the Union Customs Code (OJ L 343, 29.12.2015, p. 558). 14
References to "originating" or "non-originating" in this section should be considered only in relation to preferential origin

5.1 Consideration of the preferential origin a) UK inputs As from the withdrawal date UK inputs (material or processing operations) are considered as 'non-originating' under preferential trade arrangements for the determination of the preferential origin of goods incorporating those inputs, in accordance with the Notice to stakeholders
Withdrawal of the United Kingdom and EU rules in the field of customs and external trade: Preferential origin of goods15   b) EU imports from the UK  Goods imported into the EU from the UK as of the withdrawal date will become non-originating goods for the purposes of their use under EU preferential arrangements. This means that:    i. Goods produced in the UK before the withdrawal date, if imported into the EU as of the withdrawal date, are not considered as EU originating for the purposes of their direct exportation, or exportation after further processing, to an EU preferential partner country. ii. Goods produced in the EU27 before the withdrawal date, if imported from the UK as of the withdrawal date
are not considered as EU originating for the purposes of their direct exportation, or exportation after further processing, to an EU preferential partner country. iii. Goods originating in preferential partner countries and imported into the UK before the withdrawal date in accordance with the preferences provided by EU trade preferential arrangements, if imported into the EU after withdrawal
are not considered as originating in the corresponding partner country. These goods can therefore not be used for cumulation purposes with that partner country (bilateral cumulation) or with other partner countries (diagonal cumulation) under the EU preferential arrangements.  c) EU exports to, and imports from, preferential partner countries via the UK  Goods imported as of the withdrawal date from the EU27 via the UK into a third country with which the EU has a preferential arrangement may be entitled for preferential treatment in that third partner country, provided that the provisions on direct transport/non-manipulation contained in the origin provisions of the relevant EU preferential arrangements are respected.  Similarly, goods imported as of the withdrawal date from EU partner countries into the EU via the UK may be entitled for preferential treatment in the EU provided that the provisions on direct transport/non-manipulation contained in the origin provisions of the relevant EU preferential arrangements are respected.                                                            15 https://ec.europa.eu/taxation_customs/sites/taxation/files/notice-to-stakeholders-brexit-preferential-origin-final_en.pdf
8
d) UK Overseas Countries and Territories  Materials originating and work or processing carried out in the UK Overseas Countries and Territories (Annex II TFEU), are not considered as originating when determining the origin of goods imported into the EU from other OCTs or from EU partner countries as from the withdrawal date. 5.2 Proofs of origin a) General principle:  In principle, proofs of origin can be issued or made out only if the products comply, at the time where the proofs are issued or made out, with the origin rules established in the relevant preferential trade agreement or arrangement. As of the withdrawal date, UK content will be considered as non-originating for the purposes of issuing or making out proofs of origin. Supporting documents (including proofs of origin and suppliers' declarations) can be relied upon for the issuance of proofs of origin on the condition that they do not concern UK content which is determinant for the acquisition of origin. Exporters and competent customs or other competent authorities issuing or making out such proofs of origin as of the withdrawal date are required to ascertain whether the supporting documents meet the conditions at the time of issuance of the proof.  b) Proofs of origin issued in the EU The following proofs of origin issued or made out before the withdrawal date in the EU remain valid, when the export of the consignment has been effected or ensured before the withdrawal date.
Proofs of origin issued or made out in the UK before the withdrawal date;
Proofs of origin issued or made out in the EU27 before the withdrawal date in relation to goods with a UK content;
Certificates of origin issued by EU27 customs authorities for UK exporters; Invoice declarations, origin declarations or statements on origin made out by UK exporters for the exportation of the EU originating products from the EU27 before the withdrawal date. The validity is limited to the period established under the relevant EU trade preferential arrangements, for the purpose of being used at importation in the partner country in accordance with the relevant provisions of the EU preferential arrangements. However, EU preferential partner countries may question such proofs of origin and request verification when they accompany goods imported in the preferential partner countries as of the withdrawal date. In these cases, the EU27 Member State customs authorities will reply, to verification requests, in accordance with the possibilities available to them to confirm the originating status of the goods or the authenticity of those proofs. For those purposes, the EU origin shall be determined as of the time
when the proofs were issued, in light of the principle described in the first paragraph above. c) Proofs of origin issued in the EU preferential partner countries Proofs of origin issued or made out in EU preferential partner countries before the withdrawal date in relation to goods with UK content which was determinant for the acquisition of the partner country origin, may be used for importation purposes in the EU during the period of its validity as provided under the relevant EU trade preferential arrangements, when the export of the consignment has been effected or ensured before the withdrawal date. However, UK content incorporated in goods with EU origin imported in the EU preferential partner countries and accompanied by a valid EU proof of origin may not be used in the EU preferential partner countries for cumulation purposes as of the withdrawal date.  5.3 Supplier's declarations for preferential trade purposes  Supplier's declarations are supporting documents on which basis proofs of origin can be issued. As of the withdrawal date, they can be relied upon for the issuance of proofs of origin on the condition that they do not include UK content which is determinant for the acquisition of origin. Exporters and competent customs or other competent authorities issuing or making out such proofs of origin as of the withdrawal date are required to ascertain whether supplier's declarations meet the conditions at the time of issuance of the proof. As of the withdrawal date:  Supplier's declarations made out by UK suppliers before the withdrawal date may not be used for the purposes of issuing or making out proofs of origin in EU27 Member States as of the withdrawal date.  Suppliers in EU27 Member States providing the exporter or the trader with the information necessary to determine the preferential origin status of goods through the originating status of the goods supplied before that date and for which they   In the case of long- the suppliers established in the EU27 should inform the exporter or trader if the long-term supplier's declaration is not valid any longer as of that date for all or some consignments covered by the long- 5.4 Exporters under preferential trade As of the withdrawal date, the following aspects should be considered: a) With respect to approved exporters for the purposes of making out invoice declarations or origin declarations in accordance with the relevant provisions on preferential origin of the Union:
10
Authorisations granted by UK customs authorities to exporters and re-consignors to be approved exporters are no longer valid in the EU27 as of the withdrawal date.   Authorisations granted by EU27 customs authorities to exporters and re-consignors established in the UK are no longer valid in the EU27 as of the withdrawal date
Authorisations granted by EU27 customs authorities to exporters and re-consignors established in the EU27 with a UK EORI number are no longer valid in the EU27 as of the withdrawal date
EU approved exporters and re-consignors established in the EU27 should inform the concerned national customs authority regarding changes on the fulfilment of the conditions subject to which they were authorised, considering that UK content will be non-originating as of the withdrawal date. Accordingly, EU27 customs authorities which authorised those exporters and re-consignors as approved exporters will amend or withdraw the authorisation as appropriate. b) With respect to registered exporters (REX) for the purposes of making out invoice declarations or origin declarations in accordance with the relevant provisions on preferential origin of the Union:  Registration by UK customs authorities of exporters and re-consignors in REX are no longer valid in the EU27 as of the withdrawal date.   Registrations by EU27 customs authorities to exporters and re-consignors established in the UK are no longer valid in the EU27 as of the withdrawal date.  Registrations by EU27 customs authorities to exporters and re-consignors established in the EU27 with a UK EORI number are no longer valid in the EU27 as of the withdrawal date
EU registered exporters and re-consignors established in the EU27 should inform immediately the concerned national customs authority on any relevant change relating to information they provided for the purposes of their registration. Accordingly, EU27 customs authorities which have registered those exporters and re-consignors will revoke the registration if the conditions for being registered are no longer met. 5.5 Origin quota derogations established in certain EU FTAs  Since origin quota derogations are covered by Article 56(4) UCC, the same rules as those for tariff quotas in Section 4.1 will apply.  6.
ALUATION As of the withdrawal date, for the goods produced in the UK using assists16 and imported into the EU27 after that date, the value of those assists will have to be added                                                            16
Goods and services referred to in Article 71
)(b) UCC.
11
to the customs value of the goods, in accordance with the conditions17 specified in Article 71(1)(b) UCC and Article 135 UCC IA. 7.
NTRY OF GOODS INTO THE CUSTOMS TERRITORY OF THE UNION 7.1 Entry summary declaration (ENS) Goods brought from the UK into the customs territory of the Union as of the withdrawal date shall be covered by an entry summary declaration (ENS), where required, which has to be lodged within the time-limits set out in the UCC DA18. That covers also the goods moving between two points in the customs territory of the Union via the UK.
transit declaration comprising all security and safety data may be used to comply with ENS requirements and subject to time-limits being respected, e.g. where common transit is used
Where an ENS was lodged at the customs office of first entry in the UK before the withdrawal date, it will not remain valid for subsequent ports or airports in the EU27 where the goods are arriving as of that date. The economic operator shall lodge a new ENS covering all goods arriving in the EU27. Where in those cases the operator could not comply with the respective time-limits, the ENS lodgement should be accepted. Where an ENS was lodged at the customs office of first entry in the EU27 before the withdrawal date, with subsequent ports located in the UK and in the EU27, and where the vessel after calling at a UK port arrives in a subsequent EU27 port as of the withdrawal date, an ENS for all goods on the vessel shall be lodged. The same applies in case of diversions. Goods covered by an ENS, which had been lodged before the withdrawal date with a customs office in the UK, were diverted and arrive in the EU27 instead as of the withdrawal date. In such case, the previous ENS will be deleted by the system and deemed not having been lodged after 200 days and the economic operator has to lodge a new ENS for the goods then brought to the EU27.  In the specific cases where goods leave the UK directly for the EU27 before the withdrawal date and arrive in the customs territory of the Union as of that date, no ENS is required.  7.2 Temporary storage of goods (TS) Authorisations for the operation of temporary storage facilities granted by the UK customs authorities will cease to be valid in the EU27 as of the withdrawal date. Authorisations granted by the EU27 customs authorities including the possibility to move goods to a temporary facility in the UK will have to be amended to exclude such possibility as of the withdrawal date.                                                             17
The value of assists, apportioned as appropriate, has to be added to the price when they are supplied directly or indirectly by the buyer/importer for use in connection with the production and sale for export of the imported goods, to the extent that their value has not been included in the price actually paid or payable. 18
Article 105 UCC DA, as amended by Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2019/334 of 19 December 2018, OJ L 60, 28.2.2019, p.
.
12
Where goods in TS covered by an authorisation for the operation of TS facilities granted by the UK customs authorities will be moving between a temporary storage facility in the UK and another one in the EU27 and will arrive at the EU27 border as of the withdrawal date, those goods will be treated as non-Union goods brought to the customs territory of the Union from a third country. Where those goods arrive in the EU27 already before the withdrawal date, but their movement to an EU27 TS facility is intended to continue as of that date, that movement will not be covered by a valid authorisation. Therefore, temporary storage for those goods should end before the withdrawal date (e.g. by placing the goods under a customs procedure or re-exporting them). If such regularisation does not take place, there will be a non-compliance of the obligations laid down in the customs legislation concerning the introduction of non-Union goods into the customs territory of the Union and therefore Article 79 UCC will apply, i.e. a customs debt due to non-compliance will incur. In the case of goods in TS covered by an authorisation granted by the EU27 customs authorities and located in the UK as of the withdrawal date, such goods will be deemed to have been re-exported. 7.3 Customs status of goods As a general rule, for Union goods which are moving as intra
nion movement from the UK around the withdrawal date, their treatment will depend on when they enter the customs territory of the Union: where they enter the EU27 before the withdrawal date, they will keep their customs status of Union goods; where they arrive at the EU27 external border as of the withdrawal date, they will be treated as any other third-country goods.  For Union goods moving between two points in the customs territory of the Union via the UK, where the movement starts as an intra-Union movement, a proof of Union status shall be accepted where those goods re-enter the customs territory of the Union only as of the withdrawal date after having crossed the UK. Besides that, any formalities required for goods re-entering the customs territory of the Union will be required, e.g. ENS. Where Union goods are carried by air and have been loaded or transhipped at a UK airport for consignment to an EU27 airport and are carried under a single transport document (STD) according to Article 119(2)(a) UCC DA issued in the UK and that movement actually leaves the UK airport before the withdrawal date and arrive
at an EU27 airport on the withdrawal date, those goods will keep their Union status
This will be practically relevant only for aircraft leaving from a UK airport in the late hours before 00:00 CET on the withdrawal date on a direct flight to an EU27 airport and arriving there after 00:00 CET on the withdrawal date
Where Union goods are carried by sea on a vessel assigned to a regular shipping service and the vessel called within an ongoing voyage at a UK port and left that UK port actually before the withdrawal date and arrived directly  at an EU27 port as of the withdrawal date, i.e. without calling at any other port in a territory outside the customs territory of the Union or at any free zone in a Union port, and has not made any transhipments of goods at sea, those goods will keep their Union status. Where Union goods are carried by sea on a non-regular shipping service vessel and that vessel leaves a UK port actually before the withdrawal date for an EU27 port and  13
arrives at that port as of the withdrawal date, a proof of the customs status of Union goods shall be accepted.  Where motorised road vehicles registered in an EU27 Member State are returning from the UK and re-enter the customs territory of the Union, Article 208 UCC IA applies. To goods in baggage carried by a passenger arriving from the UK Article 210 UCC IA applies. Where packaging with Union status is returning from the UK as of the withdrawal date, its Union status shall be considered as proven in accordance with the rules set out in Article 209 UCC IA. 7.4
elief from import duty Returned goods Where Union goods were temporarily exported from the UK before the withdrawal and are re-imported in the EU27 as of the withdrawal date complying with the conditions established in Article 203 UCC, those goods shall be considered returned goods and hence be imported with total relief.  Where Union goods are brought from the EU27 to the UK before the withdrawal date and where then such goods move back to the EU27 as of the withdrawal date, the provisions on returned goods referred to in Article 203 UCC should apply if the economic operator can provide evidence that the Union goods:  were transported to the UK prior to the withdrawal date; and   return in an unaltered state in accordance with Article 203(5) UCC and Article 158 UCC DA.  The withdrawal of the UK as such, however, may not be used as special circumstances in order to exceed the three-year period referred to in Article 203(1) UCC. The proof that the Union goods were brought to the UK prior to the withdrawal date should be provided in particular by the respective transport documents and, if necessary, accompanied by other relevant documents (e.g. a lease contract). Where applicable, a proof may be required that the state of the goods has not been altered.  Duty Relief Regulation Concerning the duty relief for personal property belonging to natural persons transferring their normal place of residence from a third country to the Union, Article 5 of the Duty Relief Regulation19 foresees a continuous period of at least twelve months at a normal place of residence outside the customs territory of the Union for duty-free treatment.  For that personal property as well as for other categories of goods covered by the Duty Relief Regulation, e.g. goods imported on the occasion of a marriage set out in Article 12 Duty Relief Regulation, the requested periods, e.g. the period of residence,                                                            19
Council Regulation (EC) No 1186/2009 of 16 November 2009 setting up a Community system of reliefs from customs duty, OJ L 324, 10.12.2009, p. 23
14
may include also the period of application of that Regulation. 8.
PECIAL PROCEDURES 8.1 Transit Union/common transit procedures As of the withdrawal date, the UK accedes to the Convention on a common transit procedure20 (CTC) in its own right, hence it may use common transit and continue to have access to the New Computerised Transit System (NCTS
as a Contracting Party to the CTC. Consequently, the transit operations ongoing at the time of the withdrawal shall continue in the NCTS.  Situations where goods were released for a transit procedure in the EU27 or in a common transit country or in the UK and are moving to, from or via the UK:  a) Goods moving under a transit operation from a customs office of departure in the EU27 or in a common transit country to a customs office of destination in the UK
Where goods are placed under a Union transit procedure in the EU27 or under a common transit procedure in a common transit country with destination in the UK and those goods are still located in the EU27 as of the withdrawal date, that Union transit procedure will continue as a common transit procedure in the UK
The customs office of entry in the UK will play the role of a customs office of transit, i.e. it shall request the relevant data from the customs office of departure and fulfil all tasks of a customs office of transit. At the external EU27 border an exit summary declaration (EXS
has to be lodged
or security and safety purposes, unless the particulars necessary for risk analysis for security and safety purposes have already been provided with the transit declaration or the obligation to lodge a pre-departure declaration is waived under the UCC.  Where the goods are already located in the UK as of the withdrawal date, the transit movement will continue to the customs office of destination. b) Goods moving under a transit operation from a customs office of departure in the UK to a customs office of destination in the EU27 or in a common transit country  Where goods are placed under a Union transit procedure in the UK with destination in the EU27 or in a common transit country and the goods are still located in the UK as of the withdrawal date, that Union transit procedure will continue as a common transit procedure to the destination in the EU27 or in the common transit country
The customs office of entry in the EU27 will play the role of a customs office of transit, i.e., it shall request the relevant data from the customs office of departure and fulfil all tasks of a customs office of transit. At the external EU27 border an ENS has to be                                                            20
OJ L 226, 13.8.1987, p. 2, as last amended by Decision 1/2017, OJ L 8, 12.1.2018, p 1.
15
lodged for security and safety purposes, unless the particulars necessary for the ENS have already been provided with the transit declaration or the obligation to lodge an ENS is waived under the UCC.  Where the goods are already located in the EU27 as of the withdrawal date, that transit procedure continues to the destination in the EU27 or in the common transit country
c) Goods moving under a transit operation via the UK
Where goods move between a customs office of departure in an EU27 Member State or in a common transit country via the UK to a customs office of destination in an EU27 Member State or in a common transit country and those goods are still located in the EU2
or in a common transit country as of the withdrawal date, that transit procedure will continue as a common transit procedure in the UK
The customs office of entry in the UK and the customs office of entry in the respective Member State where the movement re-enters the customs territory of the Union, respectively, will play the role of customs offices of transit. They shall request the relevant data from the customs office of departure and fulfil all tasks of a customs office of transit. When leaving the EU27 territory (before entering to the UK) an EXS has to be lodged, unless the particulars necessary for risk analysis for security and safety purposes have already been provided with the transit declaration or the obligation to lodge a pre-departure declaration is waived under the UCC.  Where the goods have crossed the UK and re-entered the customs territory of the EU27 or of a common transit country before the withdrawal date, that transit operation will continue until its destination.  Where the goods covered by a transit declaration are crossing the UK at the time of the withdrawal or have crossed and left the UK, but have not yet re-entered the customs territory of the EU27 by the time of the withdrawal, the customs office of entry into the EU27 will act as a customs office of transit. It shall request the relevant data from the customs office of departure and fulfil all tasks of a customs office of transit. At the external EU27 border an ENS has to be lodged, unless the particulars necessary for the ENS have already been provided with the transit declaration or the obligation to lodge an ENS is waived under the UCC
Customs authorities may, for a period up to one year after UK accession to the CTC, continue to accept existing forms of the guarant undertaking
and guarantee certificates21 subject to the necessary geographical adaptations made manually and approved authorities themselves (in case of guarantee certificates). By the end of that period, the holder of that procedure must provide a new undertaking according to the modified model. Where an enquiry or recovery procedure was started, but not ended at the time of withdrawal, it is continued in the NCTS.                                                            21
Annexes 32-01, 32-02 and 32-03 and Chapters VI and VII in Part II of Annex 72-04 to the UCC IA.
16
Electronic transport document (ETD) used as a transit declaration for goods carried by air or sea Where goods are placed under an ETD transit procedure in the EU27 or in a common transit country with destination in the UK and the goods do not arrive in the UK before the withdrawal date that procedure will continue as an ETD common transit procedure to the UK airport of arrival as of that date.
Where goods are placed under an ETD transit procedure in the UK with destination in the EU27 or in a common transit country and the goods do not arrive in the EU27 or in the common transit country before the withdrawal date that procedure will continue to the airport in the EU27 or in a common transit country as of that date. Where goods are carried by sea under an ETD transit procedure between the UK and the EU27 and the regular shipping service vessel ha
left the UK port before the withdrawal date and arrived directly at an EU27 port as of the withdrawal date
i.e. without calling at any other port in a territory outside the customs territory of the Union or at any free zone in a Union port, and has not made any transhipments of goods at sea, the transit procedure will continue to its EU27 destination
Movement of goods under the TIR operations The UK (as all other Member States) is already today a Contracting Party to the TIR Convention22 will no longer be part of the customs territory of the Union, border formalities will apply to TIR operations. Although the UK will have access to the NCTS as a Contracting Party to the CTC, that access does not cover the use of the NCTS for TIR operations. a) Goods moving under a TIR operation from a customs office of departure/entry in the EU27 to a customs office of destination/exit in the UK Where goods are placed under a TIR procedure in the EU27 with destination/exit in the UK and those goods are still located in the EU27 as of the withdrawal date, that TIR procedure will, at the latest, be terminated for the Union territory at the customs office of the physical exit from the EU27. That office will become the customs office of destination/exit. It shall request the relevant data from the customs office of departure and fulfil all tasks of a customs office of destination/exit23. For the exit of the goods at the external border of the EU27, an EXS is to be lodged, unless the particulars necessary for risk analysis for security and safety purposes have already been provided or the obligation to lodge a pre-departure declaration is waived under the UCC.  Where the goods are already located in the UK or have left but not yet arrived in the UK as of the withdrawal date, the TIR movement will be subject to UK customs law and to the TIR Convention. However, the UK customs office of destination/exit will                                                            22
Customs Convention on the International Transport of Goods under cover of TIR carnets done at Geneva on 14 November 1975, OJ L 252, 14.9.1978, p. 2. 23
In particular the tasks stipulated by Articles 278 and 279 UCC IA.
17
not be able to send any NCTS TIR messages to the customs office of departure/entry located in the EU27 and thus this office will not be able to discharge those TIR operations in the NCTS with the usual electronic messages. Therefore, the holders of the procedure will have to provide an alternative proof of terminating the TIR procedure, and the customs office will have to terminate and discharge the operation manually.  b) Goods moving under a TIR operation from a customs office of departure/entry in the UK to a customs office of destination/exit in the EU27  Where goods are placed under a TIR procedure in the UK with destination in the EU27 and the goods are still located in the UK as of the withdrawal date, that TIR movement cannot continue until the destination in the EU27. When the goods arrive at a customs office at the external EU27 border, the operation will be treated as any TIR operation coming from a third country and formalities established for those goods will apply24. An ENS has to be lodged at entry into the EU27 at the UK/EU27 border, unless the particulars necessary for the ENS have already been provided or the obligation to lodge an ENS is waived under the UCC. In the NCTS, the transit procedure started in the UK cannot be closed with the usual IE messages, the UK will have to write it off manually. A new NCTS TIR movement has to be lodged by the operator with the customs office at the external EU27 border which will act as a custom
office of departure/entry for the TIR operation within the EU.  Where goods are placed under a TIR procedure in the UK with destination in the EU27 and the goods are already located in the EU27 as of the withdrawal date, that TIR movement can continue until the destination in the EU27. When the goods arrive at a customs office of destination/exit, the operation will be treated as any other TIR operation. c) Goods moving under a TIR operation via the UK
Where goods move between a customs office of departure/entry in an EU27 Member State via the UK to a customs office of destination/exit in an EU27 Member and those goods are still located in the EU27, before crossing the UK, the following applies: as of the withdrawal date, that TIR procedure shall, at the latest, be terminated at the customs office of exit from the EU27. This office then becomes the customs office of destination/exit. The "new
customs offices of destination/exit will request the relevant data from the customs office of departure and fulfil all tasks of a customs office of destination/exit. For the exit of the goods at the external border of the EU27, an EXS is to be lodged, unless the particulars necessary for risk analysis for security and safety purposes have already been provided or the obligation to lodge a pre-departure declaration is waived under the UCC. Where the goods have crossed the UK and re-entered the customs territory of the EU27 before the withdrawal date the TIR movement can continue until destination.                                                            24
TIR Handbook Section 1.2, Articles 273, 275 and 276 UCC IA, Article 184 UCC DA, Annex 10 (4) TIR Convention,  Article 19 and Annex 2 TIR Convention.
18
Where the goods covered by a TIR Carnet are crossing the UK by the time of the withdrawal, the following applies: the goods arriving at the EU27 external border will have to be treated as any other TIR movement coming from a third country and formalities established for those goods will apply. An ENS has to be lodged before entering the customs territory of the EU27 again at the UK/EU27 border unless the particulars necessary for the ENS have already been provided or the obligation to lodge an ENS is waived under the UCC. However, in the NCTS, the TIR procedure started in the EU27 Member State could continue. 8.2 Special procedures other than transit Customs warehousing (CW) UK authorisations for customs warehousing are no longer valid in the EU27 as of the withdrawal date, including those which allow for the movement of goods between different customs warehouses. The same will apply to authorisations for movements of goods from customs warehousing facilities located in the EU27 to customs warehousing facilities locate
in the UK included in customs warehousing authorisations  granted by the EU27 customs authorities (see Article 179(3) UCC DA).  Where goods stored in a UK customs warehouse are brought to the EU27 as of the withdrawal date, they have to fulfil the customs formalities established in the UCC for non-Union goods entering the customs territory of the Union from outside this territory (i.e. ENS, temporary storage declaration and customs declaration).
here goods will be moving between a customs warehouse in the UK and another one in the EU27 and arrive in the EU27 within a short period before the withdrawal date without sufficient time to reach the destination, and their movement continues in the EU27
as of that date those goods are not covered by an authorisation valid in the EU27. Therefore, the concerned economic operator should discharge this procedure before the withdrawal date (e.g. by placing the goods under a subsequent customs procedure). Such subsequent procedure may be CW as well, provided that the goods are covered by a valid authorisation granted by the EU27 customs authorities. If such regularisation does not take place, the concerned goods would not comply with the obligations laid down in the customs legislation concerning the storage of such goods within the customs territory of the Union and therefore Article 79 UCC will apply, i.e. a customs debt due to non-compliance will incur
If goods placed under CW located in the EU27 are brought to the UK before the withdrawal date (i.e. because the movement was authorised by the customs authorities) and such goods are located in the UK as of the withdrawal date, the CW procedure will be deemed to have been discharged (i.e. the goods would be considered to be taken out of the customs territory of the Union). The economic operator concerned should provide a proof, if requested by the customs authorities, showing that the goods were brought to the UK before the withdrawal date (e.g. a transport document).
Free zones  Where goods placed under a free zone procedure in the UK are brought to the EU27 as of the withdrawal date, they have to fulfil the customs formalities established in the  19
UCC for non-Union goods entering the customs territory of the Union from outside this territory (i.e. ENS, temporary storage declaration and customs declaration)
Temporary admission (TA) Any authorisations granted by the UK customs authorities to place goods under TA before the withdrawal date will not be valid in the EU27 as of that date. The procedure for goods moved under those authorisations according to Article 219 UCC to the EU27 and located in the EU27 as of the withdrawal date should be discharged before that date, so the goods have to be a) re-exported, b) placed under a subsequent customs procedure, c) destroyed with no waste remaining, or d) abandoned to the State. Such subsequent procedure may be TA as well, provided that the goods are covered by a valid authorisation granted by the EU27 customs authorities. If such discharge does not take place, the concerned goods would not comply with the obligations laid down in the customs legislation concerning the TA of such goods within the customs territory of the Union and therefore Article 79 UCC will apply, i.e. a customs debt due to non-compliance will incur. Where goods placed under temporary admission (TA) covered by an authorisation granted by the EU27 before the withdrawal date are located in the UK customs territory as of that date, and are brought from the UK to the EU27, they have to comply with the customs formalities established in the UCC for goods entering the customs territory of the Union from outside this territory (i.e. ENS, temporary storage declaration and customs declaration).  Where goods placed under TA in the EU27 are moved to the UK before the withdrawal date and such goods are located in the UK as of the withdrawal date, the TA procedure will be deemed to have been discharged (i.e. the goods would be considered to be taken out of the customs territory of the Union). The economic operator concerned should provide a proof, if requested by the customs authorities, showing that the goods were brought to the UK before the withdrawal date (e.g. a transport document).
End-use (E-U) Any authorisations granted by the UK customs authorities to place goods under E-U before the withdrawal date will not be valid in the EU27 as of that date. The procedure for goods covered by those authorisations and located in the EU27 as of the withdrawal date should be discharged before that date, so the goods have to be a) taken out of the customs territory of the Union, b) used for the purposes laid down for the application of the duty exemption or reduced rate of duty, c) destroyed with or without waste remaining, or d) abandoned to the State. The same applies in the case of authorisations for Transfer of Rights and Obligations (TORO) and for movement of goods as established in Articles 218 and 219 UCC. If the discharge mentioned above does not take place, the concerned goods would not comply with the obligations laid down in the customs legislation concerning the E-U of such goods within the customs territory of the Union and therefore Article 79 UCC will apply, i.e. a customs debt due to non-compliance will incur. Where goods placed under end-use (E-U) before the withdrawal date are located in the UK customs territory as of that date, and move therefrom to the EU27, they have to  20
comply with customs formalities applicable to any other third-country goods (i.e. ENS, temporary storage declaration and customs declaration).  Where goods placed under E-U in the EU27 are moved to the UK before the withdrawal date, and such goods are located in the UK as of the withdrawal date, the
U procedure will be deemed to have been discharged (i.e. the goods would be considered to be taken out of the customs territory of the Union). The economic operator concerned should provide a proof, if requested by the customs authorities, showing that the goods were brought to the UK before the withdrawal date (e.g. a transport document).
Inward processing (IP) Any authorisations granted by the UK customs authorities to place goods under IP before the withdrawal date will not be valid in the EU27 as of that date. The procedure for goods moved under those authorisations according to Article 219 UCC to the EU27 and located in the EU27 as of the withdrawal date should be discharged before that date, so the goods have to be a) re-exported, b) placed under a subsequent customs procedure, c) destroyed with no waste remaining, or d) abandoned to the State. Such subsequent procedure may be IP as well, provided that the goods are covered by a valid authorisation granted by the EU27 customs authorities. If such discharge does not take place, the concerned goods would not comply with the obligations laid down in the customs legislation concerning the processing of such goods within the customs territory of the Union and therefore Article 79 UCC will apply, i.e. a customs debt due to non-compliance will incur. Where goods placed under inward processing (IP) before the withdrawal date are located in the UK customs territory as of that date, and are brought from the UK to the EU27, they have to comply with the customs formalities established in the UCC for goods entering the customs territory of the Union from outside this territory (i.e. ENS, temporary storage declaration and customs declaration)
In case of an IP EX/IM authorisation granted by UK customs authorities, if equivalent goods are exported before the withdrawal date, the equivalent amount of goods (raw material) should be brought to the customs territory of the Union with total relief from import duty before the withdrawal date. Otherwise, if the equivalent goods were brought to the customs territory of the Union as of the withdrawal date, they would be treated as third country goods entering the EU territory and the relevant import duties would apply. Where goods placed under IP in the EU27 are moved to the UK before the withdrawal date, and such goods are located in the UK a
of the withdrawal date, the IP procedure will be deemed to have been discharged (i.e. the goods would be considered to be taken out of the customs territory of the Union). The economic operator concerned should provide a proof
if requested by the customs authorities
showing that the goods were brought to the UK before the withdrawal date (e.g. a transport document).  Outward processing (OP) Any authorisations granted by the UK customs authorities to place goods under OP before the withdrawal date will not be valid in the EU27 as of that date. If the  21
processed products resulting from goods placed under OP (authorisation granted by UK authorities) were not brought to the UK, but to the EU27, as of the withdrawal date, such processed products must comply with the customs formalities established in the UCC for non-Union goods brought to the customs territory of the Union. Such products cannot benefit from OP (i.e. the calculation of import duty cannot be done according to Article 86(5) UCC). In case of an OP IM/EX authorisation granted by UK customs authorities, if equivalent goods are brought to the customs territory of the Union before the withdrawal date, the equivalent amount of goods (raw material) should be exported within the time limit of the authorisation. If such export does not take place, this would entail a non-compliance with the obligations laid down in the customs legislation concerning the OP procedure and therefore Article 79 UCC will apply, i.e. a customs debt due to non-compliance will incur
9.
OODS TAKEN OUT OF THE CUSTOMS TERRITORY OF THE UNION  9.1 Pre-departure declaration According to Article 263(3) UCC, the pre-departure declaration takes the form of either (i) a customs declaration for goods to be taken out of the customs territory of the Union; (ii) a re-export declaration; or (iii) an EXS. In most cases, the pre-departure declaration will be provided in the form of a customs declaration.  Where a pre-departure declaration was lodged and, where applicable, goods were released in the UK before the withdrawal date, that declaration will not be valid where those goods enter the EU27 as of the withdrawal date to exit via the EU27 and a new pre-departure declaration will be required for those goods in the form of a re-export declaration or of an EXS, which has to be lodged within the time-limits set out in the UCC DA.25 9.2 Export and re-export Where Union goods are to be brought from the EU27 to the UK and the economic operator has no knowledge whether the goods are taken out of the EU27 before the withdrawal date, those goods may only be placed under the export procedure at any designated customs office in the EU27 as of the withdrawal date. a) Export from the EU27 crossing the UK or with a customs office of exit in the UK  Where goods were released for export from the EU27 before the withdrawal date and are carried to the customs office of exit in the UK or cross the UK on their way to a customs office of exit in another EU27 Member State, there are the following possible scenarios:  i. Where the goods on their way to the UK customs office of exit are still located in the EU27 as of the withdrawal date, the previously foreseen customs office                                                            25
Article 244 UCC DA, as amended by Commission Delegated Regulation XXX (EU) 2019/334 of 19 December 2018, OJ L 60, 28.2.2019, p. 1.
22
of exit need
to be replaced by a customs office of exit located at the EU27 border (the diversion of the export movement is executed in ECS). This customs office will confirm the physical exit of the goods and send the respective message to the customs office of export. The same applies to goods on their way to an EU27 customs office of exit which are before crossing the UK still in the customs territory of the Union. ii. Where the goods on their way to the UK customs office of exit are already located in the UK as of the withdrawal date, the UK will not be able to send any messages via ECS confirming the physical exit of the goods. The customs office of export located in the EU27 will have to close the movement in ECS based on an alternative proof. Economic operators need to provide alternative proofs to the customs office of export in order to close the movement. iii. Where the goods already have crossed the UK on their way to a customs office of exit located in another Member State, there will be no impact on the current procedure (i.e. the customs office of exit at the external EU27 border will still confirm the physical exit of the goods to the customs office of export).  b) Export from the UK with a customs office of exit located in the EU27 iv. Where goods released for export from the UK with
customs office of exit in the EU27 are still located in the UK as of the withdrawal date, they will be subject to UK customs procedures when exiting the UK. When those goods enter the customs territory of the Union as of the withdrawal date, they will be treated as any other third country goods, i.e. an ENS shall be lodged at the first entry point of the EU27, the goods will have to be placed in temporary storage and, to reach the customs office of exit, they can be placed under external transit procedure. When the goods have reached the EU27 customs office of exit, then a re-export notification, a re-export declaration or an EXS at the EU27 customs office of exit should be lodged.  v. Where goods released for export in the UK via an EU27 customs office of exit are already located in the EU27 as of the withdrawal date and reach the envisaged EU27 customs office of exit, that customs office will not be able to confirm the physical exit of the goods to the UK customs office of export, as the UK will be disconnected from the ECS as of the withdrawal date. The customs office of exit should, upon request from the economic operator, issue a proof of exit (e.g. in the form of endorsement of the EAD).  10.
USTOMS CONTROLS ON IPR, SAFETY
HEALTH AND THE ENVIRONMENT Safety, health and environment EU legislation requires goods imported in the EU, in transit or exported outside the EU to comply with a number of safety, health and environmental rules. It is the role of customs to check if goods entering or leaving the EU comply with all those rules. As of the withdrawal date, the goods brought to the customs territory of the Union from the UK or taken out from the customs territory of the Union to the UK will be subject to those rules.  The controls on the compliance with those rules can include documentary checks on import/export licences for certain goods as well as physical checks on the goods and  23
involves close cooperation and coordination with competent authorities who are responsible for the correct application of the relevant legislative requirements. It is important to emphasise that customs will only release the goods once the relevant competent authority has fully completed their controls and this has been communicated to customs via the established procedures (e.g. authorisations, licences, electronic data communication system between customs and competent authority, etc.). Import / export licences for certain goods Economic operators engaged in shipments of goods which are subject to import/export licences or which may become subject to import/export licences as of the withdrawal date are reminded of the legal repercussions which need to be considered when the UK becomes a third country. They should confirm that their goods meet all licencing obligations in order to prepare for possible changes as a result of no deal.  Further details on the consequences of withdrawal in the field of import / export licences for certain goods can be found in the "Notice to Stakeholders on the Withdrawal of the UK and EU rules in the field of import / export licences for certain goods
published on 25 January 201826 and in sectorial preparedness notices, such as the "Notice to stakeholders  withdrawal of the United Kingdom and EU waste law"27
the "Notice to stakeholders  withdrawal of the United Kingdom and EU rules in the field of export and import of hazardous chemicals"28, and the "Notice to stakeholders  withdrawal of the United Kingdom and EU rules on trade in protected species of wild fauna and flora"29. All preparedness notices are available, in all official languages of the EU, on the "Brexit preparedness website"30 of the Commission. On 19 December 2018, the Commission adopted a proposal for a Regulation31 that would add the UK to the list of third countries covered by the EU General Authorisation 001 that lifts the requirements for individual licenses when trading in dual-use items. Intellectual Property Rights For the enforcement of IPR, as of the withdrawal date the EU rules on customs enforcement of intellectual property rights, and in particular Regulation (EU) No 608/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 June 2013 concerning customs enforcement of intellectual property rights, no longer apply to the UK. Further details on the consequences of withdrawal in particular on the submission and validity of Union applications for action can be found in the "Notice to Stakeholders                                                             26
http://trade.ec.europa.eu/doclib/docs/2018/january/tradoc_156568.pdf
27
https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/file_import/waste_law_en_0.pdf 28
[to be added  will be finalised shortly] 29
https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/file_import/trade_in_protected_species_en.pdf
30
https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness/preparedness-notices_en
31
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?qid=1550165775514&uri=CELEX:52018PC0891
24
Withdrawal of the UK and EU rules in the field of customs enforcement of intellectual property rights
32 Drug Precursors With regard to EU legislation laying down rules for the monitoring of trade between the EU and third countries, Council Regulation (EC) 111/2005 in drug precursors33, certain operators will need to have obtain a licence/registration and for certain transactions import/export authorisations will be needed when trading with the UK.
European Commission Directorate-General Taxation and Customs Union                                                            32
https://ec.europa.eu/taxation_customs/sites/taxation/files/notice-to-stakeholders-brexit-ip-enforcement-final_en.pdf
33
OJ L 22, 26.1.2001, p. 1.
EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL TAXATION AND CUSTOMS UNION
Brussels, 11 March 2019
UIDANCE NOTE
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND ASPECTS OF EXCISE IN RELATION TO MOVEMENT OF GOODS ONGOING ON THE WITHDRAWAL DATE The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. This means that as from 30 March 2019, 00:00h (CET)
the United Kingdom will be a third country
This guidance note addresses a situation where the UK becomes a third country on the withdrawal date without a withdrawal agreement and hence without a transition period provided for in the draft Withdrawal Agreement.
As of the withdrawal date, the Union rules in the field of excise no longer apply to the UK. The UK will be treated as any other third country and the rules in the field of excise will apply as of that date. Furthermore, the UK will no longer have access to the EU excise IT systems. This guidance note provides guidance on the consequences of this for the cross-border intra-EU movement of excise goods between the UK and EU27, which started before the withdrawal date and will end thereafter. This document covers as well as the related features (e.g. registration and authorisations of economic operators, administrative cooperation). This document should be read in conjunction with the Guidance Note on customs issues.
Intra-EU cross-border movements of excise goods are subject to conditions and procedures specified in Directive 2008/118/EC and its related implementing regulations. Excise goods may be moved under duty suspension or while already released for consumption ("duty paid"). In the former case (duty suspension), registration and

n accordance with Article 50(3) of the Treaty on European Union, the European Council, in agreement with the United Kingdom, may unanimously decide that the Treaties cease to apply at a later date.
A third country is a country not member of the EU.
Cf. Part four of the Agreement on the withdrawal of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland from the European Union and the European Atomic Energy Community (OJ, C 66 I, 19.2.2019, p. 1

See also the "Notices to stakeholders" published by the Commission services in the area of EU customs law (https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness/preparedness-notices_en#tradetaxud).
authorisation of Economic Operators are pre-requisite; moreover, the procedures are computer-based and supported by pan-European IT systems called EMCS
for movement control and SEED
for registering excise economic operators. The withdrawal of the UK may have an impact for Economic Operators involved in the intra-EU cross-border movements of excise goods to, from, and via the UK. In particular, consignors, consignees, and guarantors should prepare for a withdrawal of the UK without a withdrawal agreement and examine their new obligations and liabilities as of the withdrawal date
1.
VERVIEW OF THE EXCISE CONSEQUENCES OF A O DEAL WITHDRAWAL OF THE UK 1.1. General Principles Excise goods that enter the excise territory of the EU from the UK or are dispatched or transported from the excise territory of the EU to the UK will respectively be treated as importation or exportation of excise goods in accordance with Council Directive 2008/118/EC of 16 December 2008 concerning the general arrangements for excise duty
Goods in transit crossing the UK land bridge between Ireland and the rest of the European Union will also be subject to additional customs formalities. 1.2. Pan-European IT system EMCS The Excise Movement and Control System (EMCS) on its own will no longer be applicable to excise duty suspended movements of excise goods from the EU into the UK, but those movements will be treated as exports, where excise supervision ends at the place of exit from the EU. Movements of excise goods to the UK will therefore require an export declaration as well as an electronic administrative document (e-AD). In case of movements of excise goods from the UK to the EU customs formalities will have to be completed before a movement under EMCS can begin
1.3. Customs Formalities If economic operators wish to continue moving excise goods to the UK or receiving goods from the UK they will need to familiarise themselves with customs formalities and should be prepared to register with the customs authorities in the Member State where they are established, in order to be assigned an EORI number, if they do not already have one. Nothing prevents those economic operators submitting the required data for the registration (Annex 12-01 UCC-DA)
before the withdrawal date. Further details can be
Excise Movement and Control System
System for Exchange of Excise Data
OJ L9, 14.1.2009, p. 12
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2015/2446 of 28 July 2015 supplementing Regulation (EU) No 952/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council as regards detailed rules concerning certain provisions of the Union Customs Code (OJ L343, 29.12.2015, p. 1)
found in the Commission services.
Stakeholders of excise movements should also consult the  Withdrawal of the United Kingdom and customs-related matters in case of no 10, in particular for further details about Union status, import, export and transit. 2.
NGOING INTRA
NION CROSS-BORDER MOVEMENTS An  is an intra-Union cross-border movement of excise goods that began but did not end before the withdrawal date. 2.1. General Principles As of the withdrawal date:  Unless explicitly stated otherwise in this document, UK authorisations and decisions are no longer valid in EU27. Consequently, any e-AD11, SAAD12 or fallback excise document approved by the UK competent authority before the withdrawal date is no longer a valid proof of Union status for the goods.  No electronic messages can be exchanged between the UK and EU27 Member States via EU-managed communication platforms such as CCN; consequently, no EMCS message and no CCN Mail message may be exchanged between the UK and EU27 Member States
No new intra-EU movement of excise goods to or from the UK may start; a corollary is that no new e-AD or SAAD may be assigned for such movements.  Unless explicitly stated otherwise in this document, all ongoing movements of excise goods from or to the UK will be considered as movements from or to a third country with all applicable consequences (e.g. status of non-Union goods, applicable customs procedures, excise duty claims, or seizing of the goods in case of non-compliance). Attention is drawn to the fact that Economic Operators, who start intra-Union cross-border movement of excise goods to/from the UK just before the withdrawal date, run a significant risk as that they can no longer be ended appropriately as mentioned in the following sections. This will generate a significant administrative burden for all stakeholders, with a risk of irregularities.  Moreover, if the excise goods arrive at destination before the
https://ec.europa.eu/taxation_customs/uk_withdrawal_en; and https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness/preparedness-notices_en#tradetaxud
10
https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness/preparedness-notices_en#tradetaxud 11
electronic Administrative Document 12
Simplified Accompanying Administrative Document
withdrawal date, Economic Operators should submit the report of receipt or SAAD Copy 3 (where applicable) as soon as possible to ensure the excise movement is also completed before the withdrawal date.  Moreover, stakeholders involved in an excise movement to or from the UK that is at risk not to be completed before the withdrawal date should take contingency measures (e.g. contact exporters or importers where appropriate) in due time, taking into account the distance between the UK and the EU27 Member States.13 2.2. Excise goods under Duty Suspension For ongoing movement
of excise goods under duty suspension to, from or through the UK:  Unless explicitly stated otherwise in this document,
Reports of Receipt or of Export cannot be electronically exchanged and fallback documents are no longer automatically mutually recognised between EU27 and the UK;
Ongoing EMCS movements will have to be closed by ad-hoc means (e.g. Manual Closure); alternate evidence of exit of the EU27 territory may be used to this purpose. Annex I  Recommended alternate evidence of exit
The data in fallback Administrative Documents related to excise movements from or to the UK may not be inserted into EMCS as of the withdrawal date as the UK will no longer be a valid Member State in this IT system. This exceptional case can cause an excise movement to remain partly or totally outside of EMCS.  As of the withdrawal date, the consignor authorisation required under Council Directive 2008/118/EC issued by the UK is no longer valid. However, if excise goods from the UK are in the EU27 territory on the withdrawal date
Member States should consider such movements as valid and they should be allowed to be closed normally14
If excise goods from the UK have not entered the EU27 before the withdrawal date, then the excise movement cannot be completed normally. The excise goods would be subject to customs formalities applicable to imports and subject to excise duty at importation, or would need to be placed in a tax warehouse or a new EMCS movement started for the place of importation under the responsibility of a registered consignor authorised in the Member State of importation
Alternatively an external transit movement, as provided                                                  13
For instance, a movement between the UK and Malta can take more than one month
14
E.g. via a Report of Receipt from the EU27 consignee or via a Report of Export from the EU27 Member State of Export; this report of receipt/export cannot however be forwarded to the UK, which was still the Member State of Dispatch at the beginning of the excise movement.
under the Union transit procedure, to the Member State of Destination can be started, which might reduce delays and formalities. Note: in any case, the EU27 Member State of Destination will have to close in an exceptional way (e.g. interruption) the excise movement in EMCS that began in the UK before the withdrawal date
If excise goods moving to the UK are still in the EU27 territory on the withdrawal date, the excise movements will no longer have a valid consignee. The consignor would have to issue a change of destination to report that the goods would be
returned to the consignor, or
sent to a new consignee in EU27 authorised to receive the goods
or
exported; this of course would require the lodging of an export declaration  If excise goods moving to the UK from the EU27 have entered the UK but the excise movement ha
not been closed before the withdrawal date then the latter cannot be closed normally in EMCS, since there is no longer a valid consignee for an intra-EU movement
However, Member States should treat such movements as valid and to allow to close them manually based on alternate evidence of exit of the EU27 (see above).
xcise goods moving through the UK between two EU27 Member States (e.g. from Belgium to Ireland) on the withdrawal date will be subject to customs formalities, if and where applicable, but the excise movement can still be completed normally.15
he excise movementeAD or fallback document will be a sufficient proof of Union status to avoid payment of import duty in the EU27. Other customs formalities will be the same as for other goods
Note: as the UK will have acceded to the Convention on a Common Transit Procedure16 by the withdrawal date, this should facilitate crossing the land bridge by allowing EMCS to be used in parallel with NCTS17, which should reduce delays and formalities
15
Council Directive 2008/118/EC article 17(1) 16 https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=LEGISSUM%3Al11025 17 New Computerised Transit System
The table below summarises the possibilities for ongoing excise movements under duty suspension: Movement Goods location on withdrawal date in UK in EU27 From UK to EU27 Customs formalities; closure (e.g. interruption) of the EMCS movement by EU27 MS of Destination + possible new e-AD from place of importation Consider excise movement as valid and to be closed normally From EU27 to UK alternate evidence of exit (evidence that goods are in the UK) to close the movement at EU27 MS of Dispatch Change of destination Through UK Customs formalities to enter EU27 MS of Destination and eAD/FAD is proof of Union status in MS of Destination: normal completion in other EU27 MS: Customs formalities to go through UK if applicable and eAD/FAD is proof of Union status
2.3. Excise goods already released for consumption (Duty Paid) Business-to-Business For intra-EU business-to-business movement of excise goods already released for consumption to or from the UK started before but still ongoing on or after the withdrawal date
EU excise procedures no longer apply; in particular, SAAD paper documents are no longer mutually recognised between EU27 and the UK;  If excise goods from the UK are in the territory of the EU27 on the withdrawal date, Member States should treat such movements as valid and to allow the consignee to close them
Where the consignee of a duty paid business-to-business movement can prove that the goods entered the territory of the EU27 before the withdrawal date but has not submitted the SAAD to the Member State of destination before this date to close the movement, the competent authority of the EU27 Member State of Destination should accept the SAAD.  If excise goods from the UK are still in the UK on the withdrawal date then they will be subject to import formalities on arrival in the EU27, including payment of excise duty at the border, unless the goods are placed under excise duty suspension within the EU27. A new excise movement would then have to be started from the Member State of importation to the Member State of Destination; alternatively an
external transit movement, as provided under the Union transit procedure, to the Member State of Destination can be started, which might reduce delays and formalities.  If excise goods moving to the UK are in the territory of the EU27, other than the Member State of dispatch on the withdrawal date, Member States should apply the same approach to such movements as they apply to the exceptional export of goods released for consumption to other third countries. In particular, where goods under cover of an SAAD cross the territory of a Member State other than the Member State of dispatch, that Member State is recommended to continue to accept the SAAD as a proof of a valid excise movement and not to charge excise duty if export formalities are fulfilled and where the goods exit for the UK. This requires an export declaration to be lodged. The Commission also recommends that the Member State of dispatch refunds or remits the already paid excise duty if the consignor provides a proof of exit.
The goods can also be returned to the location of Dispatch under cover of the SAAD
If excise goods moving to the UK are in the territory of the UK on the withdrawal date then proof of the end of the movement and payment of duty in the UK would have to be obtained that met the needs of the MS of Dispatch. There is no legal obligation for a Member State to refund excise duty in the case of exported duty paid goods. However, if the certified copy 3 of the SAAD was issued by the UK18 before the withdrawal date this should be treated as a normal excise movement and requests for refund of excise duty in the Member State of dispatch should be treated normally. Other refunds would be at the discretion of the MS of Dispatch.
xcise goods moving through the UK between two EU27 Member States (e.g. from Belgium to Ireland) may be subject to Customs formalities, although import duty should not be charged, since the SAAD is a valid proof of Union status.
Note: as the UK will have acceded the Convention on a Common Transit Procedure by the withdrawal date, this should facilitate crossing the land bridge by allowing the use of NCTS19, which should reduce delays and formalities
Note: Refunds of excise duty may not be available due to lack of legally acceptable evidence and the absence of a common legal base for refunds of excise duty on the export of duty paid goods. Any remission or reimbursement of excise duty in these circumstances is a national matter.
18 Or other document issued by the UK and accepted by the Member State of Dispatch, certifying that the goods have been delivered and the chargeable excise duty has been paid in the UK 19 New Computerised Transit System
Business-to-Consumer (Distance Selling) The same principles as business-to-business apply mutatis mutandis to distance selling procedures for intra-EU cross-border distance sales of excise goods to or from the UK started before but still ongoing on or after the withdrawal date. No distance sales of excise goods from or to the UK may start as of the withdrawal date. 2.4. EMCS ARC Follow Up The "EMCS ARC Follow Up20" feature on the europa.eu website (to enter production in February 2019) will remain available for EMCS movements to/from the UK that started before the withdrawal date. However, as described above, no new information exchange to/from the UK can be received via trans-European IT systems for the movements that were not completed before the withdrawal date. Consequently, the status of such movements will not be updated in "EMCS ARC Follow Up" as of the withdrawal date
For instance, if an ongoing movement to the UK is closed manually after the withdrawal date by the EU27 Member State of Dispatch then the manual closure will be visible only in the National Excise Application of this Member State and not in the common domain of EMCS. Therefore, the manual closure and the related status update of the movement will not be visible in EMCS ARC Follow Up. Member States are recommended to inform economic operators of this limitation and the unreliability of this information around the period of the withdrawal of the UK
3.
XCISE DEBT
EXEMPTIONS AND GUARANTEE As of the withdrawal date
no guarantee will be automatically mutually recognised between the UK and EU27 Member States;  no exemption will be automatically mutually recognised between the UK and EU27 Member States;  no excise debts will be managed between the UK and EU27 Member States; and  there will be no legal basis for calling upon guarantees held by UK consignors and/or consignees.                                                  20 EMCS ARC Follow Up is a feature that allows a user to enter an Administrative Reference Code and get limited information on the related EMCS movement (e.g. status, MS of Dispatch, MS of destination, list of main messages exchanged); it is a publicly available feature that requires neither identification nor authentication.
4.
CONOMIC OPERATORS REGISTRATION AND AUTHORISATION 4.1. Overview This section applies only to the Economic Operators registered in SEED, i.e. authorised to perform intra-EU cross-border movements of excise goods under duty suspension. 4.2. Expiration of UK registrations and authorisations As of the withdrawal date, the registration of Economic Operators established in the UK and their authorisation will be invalid. Consequently
they will not be able to send or receive new e-ADs (see also section
). Member States are also recommended to check that e-ADs have not been accepted before Brexit, but with a dispatch date recorded in the future after the withdrawal date.21 Member States should request that economic operators do not submit e-ADs with dispatch dates to after the withdrawal date.   No creation, update or new invalidations of registrations and authorisations of Economic Operators established in the UK will be possible after the withdrawal date
The records of such Economic Operators and authorisations will be kept in SEED for 4 years so that ongoing movements can be closed manually and EU27 Member States' auditors and other staff can access UK Economic Operators data. 4.3. "Orphan" EU27 Tax Warehouses As illustrated in the schema hereafter, it may happen that Tax Warehouses in the territory of EU27 are related only to Tax Warehouse Keepers established in the UK. In this case, such Tax Warehouses will be left "orphan" (i.e. with no authorised warehouse keepers established in EU2722) after the withdrawal date. This implies that such Tax Warehouses will actually not be able to operate intra-EU27 cross-border movements of excise goods under duty suspension.  Member States Administrations and Economic Operators are advised to take all necessary measures before the withdrawal date in order to avoid such situations. A measure can be to assign a valid warehouse keeper established in a EU27 Member State
21
An e-AD can be submitted up to 7 days before the planned date of dispatch
22 After the withdrawal date, the record of the UK tax warehouse keepers will still be present in SEED but their authorisation will be invalid. 10 Before withdrawal date After withdrawal date

EU27 warehouse UK authorised keepers only EU27 warehouse No EU27 authorised keeper
4.4. Access of the UK to SEED As of the withdrawal date, no SEED data will be shared with the UK. In particular:  SEED data will not been synchronised any longer with UK national IT systems
the officials of the UK administration will have no access to SEED on WEB (SEED's human user interface, which allows reading and modifying SEED data). This implies that as of the withdrawal date, EU27's and the UK's view of each other's Economic Operators data will be the "snapshot" at the time of the withdrawal date, when the latest data synchronisation will have occurred. 5.
EFERENCE DATA 5.1. Customs Office List and Excise Role As of the withdrawal date all excise roles will be removed from all UK customs offices in the Customs Office List. 5.2. Code Lists As of the withdrawal date, excise IT systems' code lists will not be shared with the UK. 6.
TATISTICS As of the withdrawal date, the officials of the UK administration will have no access to excise trans-European IT systems' operational statistics provided by the central IT component CS/MISE, neither via its user interface nor via consolidated reports. 7.
VAILABILITY MANAGEMENT As of the withdrawal date, no excise IT system's unavailability will be shared between the UK and EU27. 11 8.
DMINISTRATIVE COOPERATION As of withdrawal date, the Administrative Cooperation Regulation23 and the Naples II Convention, no longer apply to the UK. All pending administrative cooperation procedures on the withdrawal date on the basis of EU law between the EU27 Member States and the UK will be discontinued on the withdrawal date.
As of the withdrawal date, n
information exchange will be possible between the UK and EU27 Member States via excise trans-European IT systems such as EMCS or CCN Mail
It will no longer be possible to make new administrative cooperation requests or to receive or to send replies to open administrative cooperation requests.  However, mutual assistance requests concerning excise issues may be possible between certain Member States and the UK using the OECD-Council of Europe Convention of 25.1.1988 on mutual administrative assistance in tax matters.24
European Commission
irectorate
eneral Taxation and Customs Union
23
Council Regulation (EU) No 389/2012 24 Administrative cooperation in the field of excise duties: OECD-Council of Europe Convention of 25.1.1988 on mutual administrative assistance in tax matters between the UK (not including Gibraltar) and the following MS of the EU27: BE, BG, CZ, DK, EE, ES, FR, EL, HU, LV, NL, PL, PT, RO, FI, SI, and SE. Member States are advised to examine the detail content of their act of accession to check for potential reservations. 12
ANNEX

ECOMMENDED ALTERNATE EVIDENCE OF EXIT A document in which the competent authority of the UK certify the delivery25 or the entry into the UK territory in accordance with the rules and procedures applicable to that certification may be considered an appropriate alternate evidence of exit by EU27 Member States
Moreover, EU27 Member States may also take into account anyone of the following pieces of evidence or a combination of them:  (i) a delivery note;  (ii) a document signed or authenticated by the economic operator who has taken the excise goods out of the customs territory of the Union certifying the exit of the goods;  (iii) a document in which the customs authority of a Member State or a third country certify the delivery in accordance with the rules and procedures applicable to that certification in that State or country; (iv) records of goods supplied to ships, aircraft or offshore installations kept by economic operators; (v) other alternative pieces of evidence acceptable to the authorities of the  Member State of dispatch.
Competent authorities in each EU27 Member State perform their own assessment of the validity of such evidence.
25 Even though fallback documents are no longer automatically mutually recognised between the UK and EU27, a fallback report of receipt certified by a UK competent authority may be considered an appropriate evidence of delivery by the competent authority of a EU27 Member State.

EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL TAXATION AND CUSTOMS UNION
Brussels, 13 March 2019
UIDANCE NOTE
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM FROM THE EUROPEAN UNION AND ASPECTS OF ADMINISTRATIVE COOPERATION IN THE FIELD OF VALUE ADDED TAX (VAT
AND MUTUAL TAX RECOVERY ASSISTANCE IN CASE OF WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM IN CASE OF NO DEAL The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. This means that as from 30 March 2019, 00:00h (CET)
the United Kingdom will be a third country
This guidance note addresses a situation where the United Kingdom becomes a third country on the withdrawal date without a withdrawal agreement and hence without a transition period provided for in the draft Withdrawal Agreement.
1.
EFERENCES
REGULATION (EU)
O 904/2010
ARTICLES 45 AND 46.
UBJECT
SPECIAL SCHEMES PROVIDED FOR IN CHAPTER
OF TITLE XII OF DIRECTIVE 2006/112/EC
TRANSMISSION AND TRANSFER BY THE MEMBER STATE OF IDENTIFICATION OR THE UNITED KINGDOM (UK) TO EITHER THE UK OR THE MEMBER STATES OF CONSUMPTION OF THE RETURNS AND AMOUNTS SUBMITTED AND PAID BY NON-ESTABLISHED TAXABLE PERSONS REGARDING THE FIRST QUARTER 2019 UNTIL WITHDRAWAL OF THE UK FROM THE EU
AFTER WITHDRAWAL OF THE UK FROM THE EUROPEAN UNION (EU) WITHOUT A WITHDRAWAL AGREEMENT
As from the withdrawal date, Regulation (EU) No 904/2010 will cease to apply to the UK. The SCAC-Expert Group in the field of VAT administrative cooperation (SCAC-EG)
is of the opinion that, subject to reciprocity by the UK, the Member States of
In accordance with Article 50(3) of the Treaty on European Union, the European Council, in agreement with the United Kingdom, may unanimously decide that the Treaties cease to apply at a later date.
A third country is a country not member of the EU.
Cf. Part four of the Agreement on the withdrawal of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland from the European Union and the European Atomic Energy Community (OJ, C 66 I, 19.2.2019, p. 1).
Council Regulation (EU) No 904/2010 of 7 October 2010 on administrative cooperation and combating fraud in the field of value added tax (OJ L 268, 12.10.2010, p. 1).
Council Directive 2006/112/EC of 28 November 2006 on the common system of value added tax (OJ L 347, 11.12.2006, p. 1).
The SCAC-cooperation in the field of VAT.
2 identification shall transmit and transfer to the UK, as state of consumption, the returns and amounts submitted and paid within the legal deadline by taxable persons registered in a Member State of the EU-27 for the special schemes provided for in Chapter 6 of Title XII of Directive 2006/112/EC regarding services supplied in the UK in the first quarter 2019 before the withdrawal of the UK from the EU. The SCAC-EG is of the opinion that such transmissions and transfers will take place after the EU-27 has received the formal reciprocal commitment of the UK authorities and the technical arrangements regarding the reciprocal transmission of the returns in a secure way have been worked out.   2.
EFERENCES
REGULATION (EU)
O 1189/2011
ARTICLE 23.
UBJECT
TRANSFER OF AMOUNTS RECOVERED BY THE EU-27
EMBER STATES ON BEHALF OF THE UNITED KINGDOM (UK) BUT NOT YET TRANSFERRED BEFORE THE WITHDRAWAL DATE
As from the withdrawal date, Regulation (EU) No 1189/2011 will cease to apply to the UK. The Recovery Expert Group
is of the opinion that, subject to reciprocity by the UK, the Member States shall transfer and transmit to the UK, as applicant state, the amounts recovered by the Member States but not yet transferred to the UK before the withdrawal date, and the information relating to these amounts. The Recovery Expert Group is of the opinion that such transfers and transmissions will take place after the EU-27 has received the formal reciprocal commitment of the UK authorities and the technical arrangements regarding the reciprocal transfer and transmission in a secure way have been worked out.
European Commission
irectorate
eneral Taxation and Customs Union

Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) No 1189/2011 of 18 November 2011 laying down detailed rules in relation to certain provisions of Council Directive 2010/24/EU concerning mutual assistance for the recovery of claims relating to taxes, duties and other measures (OJ L 302, 19.11.2011, p. 16).
The Recovery Expert Group mutual assistance for the recovery of claims relating to taxes, duties and other measures, in accordance with Council Directive 2010/24/EU.
Commission europenne, B-1049 Bruxelles / Europese Commissie, B-1049 Brussel  Belgium  Tel.:
32
299 11 11

EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL  TAXATION AND CUSTOMS UNION Indirect Taxation and Tax administration Value added tax
taxud.c.1(2019)1857557  EN
Brussels, 13 March 201
VALUE ADDED TAX COMMITTEE (ARTICLE 398 OF DIRECTIVE 2006/112/EC)
ORKING PAPER NO 962 FINAL
GUIDELINES ON VAT RELATED ISSUES IN VIEW OF THE WITHDRAWAL  OF THE UNITED KINGDOM FROM THE EUROPEAN UNION
WITHOUT AN AGREEMENT taxud.c.1(2019)1857557  Working paper No 962 FINAL VAT Committee  Guidelines on VAT related issues in view of the withdrawal of the United Kingdom from the European Union without an agreement
/
QUESTIONS CONCERNING THE APPLICATION OF EU VAT PROVISIONS IN CASE OF WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM FROM THE EUROPEAN UNION WITHOUT AN AGREEMENT CONTEXT OF THIS SET OF GUIDELINES
the United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. This means that as from 30

1. Origin: Commission
References: Articles 63, 68 and 70 of Directive 2006/112/EC
Subject: On-going movements of goods from the United Kingdom to the EU-27 Member States at the moment of its withdrawal An intra-Community acquisition of goods is regarded as being made when the corresponding supply is effected. Such a supply may be effected at the time when dispatch or transport of the goods begins or during dispatch or transport. Given the principles of neutrality of VAT, legal certainty and the requirement to ensure a rational taxation that avoids double taxation, the VAT Committee therefore almost unanimously agrees that any intra-Community acquisition of goods of which the dispatch or transport from the United Kingdom to the EU-27 Member States started before its withdrawal from the EU shall be disregarded if the importation of these goods, as provided for in Article 30 of the VAT Directive, in a Member State of the EU-27 has taken place as from the withdrawal date. 2. Origin: Commission
Reference: Article 143(1)(e) of Directive 2006/112/EC
Subject: Reimportation of goods after the withdrawal of the United Kingdom The VAT Committee almost unanimously agrees that the notion of "reimportation", as referred to in Article 143(1)(e) of the VAT Directive, shall also cover situations of importation where goods have not been exported but were transported or dispatched from one of the EU-27 Member States to the United Kingdom before the withdrawal date and are returned from the United Kingdom as from the withdrawal date. As there was no export declaration, the VAT Committee almost unanimously agrees that the person who exported the goods shall use alternative means to prove that the goods are reimported in unaltered state within the time limit referred to in Article 203(1) of Regulation (EU) No 952/2013 laying down the Union Customs Code

In accordance with Article 50(3) of the Treaty on European Union, the European Council, in agreement with the United Kingdom, may unanimously decide that the Treaties cease to apply at a later date.
A third country is a country not member of the EU.
OJ L 269, 10.10.2013, p. 1. taxud.c.1(2019)1857557  Working paper No 962 FINAL VAT Committee  Guidelines on VAT related issues in view of the withdrawal of the United Kingdom from the European Union without an agreement
/
3. Origin: Commission
Reference: Article 4 of Directive 2009/132/EC
Subject: Personal property imported after the withdrawal of the United Kingdom The VAT Committee almost unanimously agrees that, where natural persons move their normal place of residence from the United Kingdom to an EU-27 Member State within
months as from the withdrawal date, the exemption laid down in Article 4 of Directive 2009/132/EC shall apply to personal property imported by these persons in the EU-27 as from the withdrawal date, insofar as the goods concerned have been in the possession of and, in the case of non-consumable goods, used by the person concerned at his or her former normal place of residence in the United Kingdom for a minimum of six months (except in special cases justified by circumstances) before the date on which he or she ceased to have his or her normal place of residence outside the EU-27. The VAT Committee almost unanimously agrees, however, that the exemption of personal property shall be made conditional upon such property having borne the customs and/or fiscal charge
to which it was normally liable in the United Kingdom or in one of the EU-27 Member States before the importation in the EU, in accordance with Article 4, paragraph 2, of Directive 2009/132/EC. 4. Origin: Commission
References: Directive
86/560/EEC, 2006/112/EC and 2008/9/EC
Subject: Refund of VAT charged before the withdrawal date in the United Kingdom or in an EU-27 Member State to taxable persons not established in the State of refund but established respectively either in an EU-27 Member State or in the United Kingdom Regarding VAT charged before the withdrawal date in the United Kingdom or in an EU-27 Member State to taxable persons not established in the State of refund but established respectively either in an EU-27 Member State or in the United Kingdom, the VAT Committee almost unanimously confirms the following: (1) As from the withdrawal date, Directive 2008/9/EC no longer applies for the United Kingdom, this entailing, inter alia, that a taxable person established in one of the EU-27 Member States or in the United Kingdom shall not be able as from the withdrawal date to use the electronic portal set up by his State of establishment for submitting an electronic refund application in accordance with Article 7 of Directive 2008/9/EC. (2) As from the withdrawal date the exchange of information between tax authorities relating to VAT refund applications provided for in Article 48(2) and (3) of Regulation (EU) No 904/2010 no longer applies in relation to the United Kingdom and any request for information by the State of refund with regard to a VAT refund application shall therefore be addressed directly to the taxable person concerned. taxud.c.1(2019)1857557  Working paper No 962 FINAL VAT Committee  Guidelines on VAT related issues in view of the withdrawal of the United Kingdom from the European Union without an agreement
/
(3) Those taxable persons who have not submitted a refund application before the withdrawal date, or in respect of which the refund application has not yet been forwarded by their State of establishment to the State of refund by that date, must submit their refund application directly to the State of refund. For the EU-27 Member States, this shall be according to the procedure by which Directive 86/560/EEC has been implemented
(4) The provisions on reciprocity (Article 2(2) of Directive 86/560/EEC), on the appointment of a tax representative (Article 2(3) of Directive 86/560/EEC) and on the exclusion of certain expenditure or possible additional conditions (Article 4(2) of Directive 86/560/EEC) shall not be applicable in respect of VAT charged before the withdrawal date. However, in accordance with Article 273 of Directive 2006/112/EC, Member States may require the applicant to provide evidence of his status as taxable person or the original or copy of the invoices. Although, as from the withdrawal date, Directive 2008/9/EC ceases to apply for the United Kingdom, the VAT Committee almost unanimously acknowledges that in regard to VAT charged to a taxable person before the withdrawal date the rights and corresponding obligations of taxable persons derived from that Directive shall continue to apply, encompassing notably the right to a refund of VAT, the time limits to submit a refund application, the information to be provided, the time limits to be notified or to be requested to provide additional information, the time limits to provide the requested additional or further additional information, the time limits to be refunded and the right to receive interest in case of late payment. Further, the VAT Committee almost unanimously agrees that refund applications relating to VAT charged from 1 January 2019 until and including the day before the withdrawal date shall be treated as relating to the remainder of a calendar year.