EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL FOR COMMUNICATIONS NETWORKS, CONTENT AND TECHNOLOGY
Brussels, 19 March 2018
OTICE TO STAKEHOLDER
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND EU RULES IN THE FIELD O
AUDIOVISUAL MEDIA SERVICES The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. This means that
unless a ratified withdrawal agreement
establishes another date, all Union primary and secondary law will cease to apply to the United Kingdom from 30 March 2019, 00:00h (CET) ('the withdrawal date').
The United Kingdom will then become a 'third country'.
Preparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for EU and national authorities but also for private parties.  In view of the considerable uncertainties, in particular concerning the content of a possible withdrawal agreement, all interested parties, and especially providers of audiovisual media services
are reminded of legal repercussions, which need to be considered when the United Kingdom becomes a third country
Subject to any transitional arrangement that may be contained in a possible withdrawal agreement, as of the withdrawal date, the EU rules in the field of audiovisual media services will no longer apply to the United Kingdom. This has in particular the following consequences: 1.
OUNTRY OF ORIGIN AND JURISDICTION Directive 2010/13/EU
(the Audiovisual Media Services Directive) relies on the so-called "Country-of-Origin" principle, according to which media service providers
shall, as a
Negotiations are ongoing with the United Kingdom with a view to reaching a withdrawal agreement.
Furthermore, in accordance with Article 50(3) of the Treaty on European Union, the European Council, in agreement with the United Kingdom, may unanimously decide that the Treaties cease to apply at a later date.
A third country is a country not member of the EU.
Directive 2010/13/EU on the coordination of certain provisions laid down by law, regulation or administrative action in Member States concerning the provision of audiovisual media services (Audiovisual Media Services Directive), OJ L 95, 15.4.2010, 1.
It is noted that the Audiovisual Media Services Directive is currently under review. The Commission adopted on 25 May 2016 a legislative proposal with a view to amend that Directive. See COM(2016)287.
general rule
be subject only to the law and the jurisdiction of their EU Member State of origin (as determined in the Directive), including when their programmes are received and/or re-transmitted in other EU Member States.
The Audiovisual Media Services Directive sets out specific rules for determining which EU Member State has jurisdiction over a media service provider in accordance with the Country-of-Origin principle. In particular, such providers shall be under the jurisdiction of the authorities of the Member State in which they are established on the basis of specific criteria laid down in the Directive
When these criteria are not applicable, subsidiary criteria are set out for media service providers broadcasting via satellite
In cases where none of the above criteria are applicable, the competent Member State shall be that in which the provider is established within the meaning of Article 49 to 55 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union. As of the withdrawal date, audiovisual media services providers currently under the jurisdiction of United Kingdom authorities (for example because they are established in the United Kingdom within the meaning of the Directive
may fall under the jurisdiction of one of the EU-27 Member States if the criteria laid down in Article 2 of the Audiovisual Media Services Directive are fulfilled
Moreover, EU-27 Member States will be free to take whatever measures they will deem appropriate with regard to audiovisual media services coming from the United Kingdom as a third countr
and not satisfying the conditions laid down in Article 2 of the Audiovisual Media Services Directive, provided they comply with Union law and the international obligations of the Union and, where applicable, within the limits of the European Convention on Transfrontier Television
(cf. recital 54 of the Audiovisual Media Services Directive)
2.
OUNTRY OF ORIGIN AND
REEDOM OF TRANSMISSION/RECEPTION Under Article 3 o
the Audiovisual Media Services Directive, EU Member States shall ensure freedom of reception and shall not restrict retransmission on their territory of audiovisual media services from other Member States for reasons which fall within the fields coordinated by this Directive. As of the withdrawal date, audiovisual media services of United Kingdom media service providers received or retransmitted in the EU will no longer benefit from the freedom of reception and retransmission laid down in Article 3 of the Audiovisual Media Services Directive. Therefore, EU-27 Member State
will be entitled, based on their own national law and, where applicable, within the limits of the European Convention on Transfrontier
As defined in the Audiovisual Media Services Directive.
Such criteria include, in particular, the location of the provider's head office, the place where editorial decisions about the audiovisual media service are taken, the place from where of the majority of the workforce involved in the service operates (cf. Article 2(3) of the Audiovisual Media Services Directive).
These criteria are: the Member State where the satellite uplink is situated or, in the absence of a satellite uplink in a Member State, the Member State to which the satellite capacity used by the provider appertains (cf. Article 2(4) of the Audiovisual Media Services Directive).
20 of the EU-27 Member States and the United Kingdom are parties to this Convention. The following EU Member States are not parties: Belgium, Denmark, Greece, Ireland, Luxembourg, Netherlands and Sweden (https://www.coe.int/en/web/conventions/full-list/-/conventions/treaty/132).
3 Television, to restrict reception and retransmission of audiovisual media services originating from the United Kingdom
The website of the Commission on audiovisual media services
https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/policies/audiovisual-media-services) provide
general information on the rules concerning audiovisual media services in the Union. These pages will be updated with further information, where necessary.
European Commission
irectorate
eneral for Communications Networks, Content and Technology
Under its Articles 13, 16 and 17, the Audiovisual Media Services Directive lays down specific rules for the promotion of distribution and production of European works, such as minimum quota reserved for European works. Article 1(1)(n) of the current Audiovisual Media Services Directive considers as European works originating in European third States party to the European Convention on Transfrontier Television of the Council of Europe and fulfilling the conditions of paragraph 3 of the above mentioned Article. Therefore, pursuant to the current version of the Directive and without prejudice to any change to the legal framework, works originating in United Kingdom are considered European works even after the withdrawal date for the purpose of fulfilling the quotas under Article 13, 16 and 17 of the Directive

EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL FOR COMMUNICATIONS NETWORKS, CONTENT AND TECHNOLOGY
Brussels, 21 March 2018
OTICE TO STAKEHOLDER
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND EU RULES IN THE FIELD OF  ELECTRONIC IDENTIFICATION AND TRUST SERVICES FOR ELECTRONIC TRANSACTIONS The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. This means that
unless a ratified withdrawal agreement
establishes another date, all Union primary and secondary law will cease to apply to the United Kingdom from 30 March 2019, 00:00h (CET) ('the withdrawal date').
The United Kingdom will then become a 'third country'.
Preparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for EU and national authorities but also for private parties.  In view of the considerable uncertainties, in particular concerning the content of a possible withdrawal agreement, stakeholders, in particular providers of trust services, providers of notified electronic identification schemes or parties relying on notified electronic identification schemes are reminded of legal repercussions, which need to be considered when the United Kingdom becomes a third country
Subject to any transitional arrangement that may be contained in a possible withdrawal agreement, as of the withdrawal date, Regulation (EU) No 910/2014 on electronic identification and trust services for electronic transactions in the internal market
no longer applies to the United Kingdom. This has in particular the following consequences
1.
RUST SERVICES In accordance with Article 4 of Regulation (EU) No 910/2014 there must be no restriction on the provision of trust services in the territory of a Member State by a trust
Negotiations are ongoing with the United Kingdom with a view to reaching a withdrawal agreement.
Furthermore, i
accordance with Article 50(3) of the Treaty on European Union, the European Council, in agreement with the United Kingdom, may unanimously decide that the Treaties cease to apply at a later date.
A third country is a country not member of the EU.
Regulation (EU) N°910/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 July 2014 of 23 July 2014 on electronic identification and trust services for electronic transactions in the internal market, OJ L 257, 28.8.2014, p. 73.
2 service provider established in another Member State for reasons that fall within the fields covered by that Regulation
In accordance with Article 14 of Regulation (EU) No 910/2014 "qualified trust services" can only be provided by EU-based trust service providers or by trust service providers established in a third country which has an international agreement with the EU on the recognition of trust services. As of the withdrawal date
trust service providers established in the United Kingdom will be third country trust service providers for the purposes of Regulation (EU) No 910/2014. They will not benefit from Article 4 of Regulation (EU) No 910/2014. Additionally, trust services provided by trust service providers established in the United Kingdom will not be considered as "qualified trust services
in the EU.  2.
LECTRONIC IDENTIFICATION SCHEMES In accordance with Article 6 of Regulation (EU) No 910/2014, when an electronic identification using an electronic identification means and authentication is required under national law or by administrative practice to access a service provided by a public sector body online in one Member State, the electronic identification means issued in another Member State shall be recognised in the first Member State for the purposes of cross-border authentication for that service online, provided that certain conditions set out in that Article are met: notably, that the electronic identification means issued under an electronic identification scheme included in the list published by the Commission pursuant to Article 9 of Regulation (EU) No 910/2014.  As of the withdrawal date, electronic identification schemes which may have been notified by the United Kingdom before the withdrawal date pursuant to Article 9 of Regulation (EU) No 910/2014 will no longer be recognised by EU-27 Member States pursuant to Article 6 of Regulation (EU) No 910/2014
The website of the Commission on Trust Services and electronic identification (https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/policies/trust-services-and-eidentification) provide
general information concerning Regulation (EU) No 910/2014. These pages will be updated with further information, where necessary.
European Commission
irectorate
eneral for Communications Networks, Content and Technology

EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL FOR COMMUNICATION NETWORKS,
ONTENT AND TECHNOLOGY
Brussels, 21 March 2018 Rev1
OTICE TO STAKEHOLDER
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND EU LEGISLATION IN THE FIELD OF
GEO-BLOCKING The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. This means that
unless a ratified withdrawal agreement
establishes another date, all Union primary and secondary law will cease to apply to the United Kingdom from 30 March 2019, 00:00h (CET) ('the withdrawal date').
The United Kingdom will then become a 'third country'.
Preparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for EU and national authorities but also for private parties.  In view of the considerable uncertainties, in particular concerning the content of a possible withdrawal agreement, stakeholders are reminded of legal repercussions, which need to be considered when the United Kingdom becomes a third country
Subject to any transitional arrangement that may be contained in a possible withdrawal agreement, as of the withdrawal date, Regulation (EU) 2018/302
on addressing unjustified geo-blocking and other forms of discrimination based on customers' nationality, place of residence or place of establishment within the internal market will no longer apply to the United Kingdom. This has in particular the following consequences

Negotiations are ongoing with the United Kingdom with a view to reaching a withdrawal agreement.
Furthermore, in accordance with Article 50(3) of the Treaty on European Union, the European Council, in agreement with the United Kingdom, may unanimously decide that the Treaties cease to apply at a later date.
A third country is a country not member of the EU.
Regulation (EU) 2018/302 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 28 February 2018 on addressing unjustified geo-blocking and other forms of discrimination based on customers' nationality, place of residence or place of establishment within the internal market, OJ L 60
, 2.3.2018, p. 1.
2 1.
USTOMERS From its date of application (3 December 2018), Regulation (EU) 2018/302 prohibits discrimination based on customers' nationality, place of residence or place of establishment, including unjustified geo-blocking, in certain cross-border transactions between a trader and a customer in relation to the sales of goods and the provision of services within the EU. In particular, it provides for the following measures protecting customers
ban of discriminatory blocking or limiting customers' access to traders' online interfaces (e.g. a website) and redirecting them to another online interface without the  prior consent (Article 3);  prohibition on traders to apply
in certain defined situations, on a discriminatory basis different conditions of access for customers to goods and services (Article 4; informally known as "shop like a local" principle)
non-discrimination for reasons related to payment (Article 5). As of the withdrawal date, natural persons residing in the United Kingdom (unless they have a nationality of a Member State) or undertakings established in the United Kingdom will not be able to benefit from Regulation (EU) 2018/302:
Firstly
such persons or undertakings wh
wish to access websites in the EU will not benefit from the aforementioned ban related to access to traders' online interfaces. This means that a trader could block, limit or redirect those customers to specific versions of his/her website which might be different from the one that the customers initially sought to access.   Secondly, such persons or undertakings will not have the guarantee to be able to "shop like a local" in the EU in the situations covered by Article 4 of the Regulation, including benefitting from the same prices and conditions relating to the delivery of goods and services as the locals (i.e. the customers of the trader's home Member State). For example, the off-line and on-line sales of goods and services, such as goods delivered or picked up in the EU territory, tickets for sports events or amusement parks in Member States, and the sale of electronically supplied services, such as hosting services, are areas where those customers will be affected.  Thirdly, such persons or undertakings using payment means from the United Kingdom will not be protected against traders applying different conditions for a payment transaction from the ones offered to EU customers
or refused to complete the purchase for reasons related to payment
when (wanting to
pay electronically for good
or service
2.
RADERS Regulation (EU) 2018/302 applies to all traders operating within the EU, regardless of whether those traders are established in the EU or in a third countr
(recital 17).
Both consumers and businesses

Therefore,
s of the withdrawal date, traders who are established in the United Kingdom and offer their goods or services to customers in the EU will continue to be bound by the rules established by the Regulation (EU) 2018/302 in respect of those activities
The website of the Commission https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/geo-blocking-digital-single-market provide
general information concerning geo-blocking. This page will be updated with further information on the United Kingdom's withdrawal, where necessary.
European Commission
irectorate
eneral for Communication Networks, Content and Technology

EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL FOR COMMUNICATIONS NETWORKS, CONTENT AND TECHNOLOGY
Brussels, 18 July 2019 REV1  replaces the notice  published on 28 March 2018
OTICE TO STAKEHOLDER
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND EU RULES ON
EU DOMAIN NAMES The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union (TEU). Following
request by the United Kingdom
the European Council (Article
0) agreed on 11 April 2019
to extend further
the period provided for in Article 50(3) TEU until 31 October 2019.
This means that the United Kingdom will be, as of 1 November 2019 a third country

Preparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for EU and national authorities but also for private parties. In view of the uncertainties surrounding the ratification of the Withdrawal Agreement
the .eu Top Level Domain Registry, accredited .eu Registrars, .eu domain names registrants, applicants for .eu domains names and generally stakeholders are reminded of legal repercussions, which need to be considered when the United Kingdom becomes a third country

European Council Decision (EU) 2019/584, OJ L 101, 11.4.2019, p. 1.
Following a request by the United Kingdom, the European Council had decided a first extension on 22 March 2019 (European Council Decision (EU) 2019/476, OJ L 80 I, 22.3.2019, p. 1).
On 11 April 2019, following a second request for an extension by the United Kingdom, the European Council also decided that the decision to extend until 31 October 2019 would cease to apply on 31 May 2019 if the United Kingdom had not held elections to the European Parliament and had not ratified the Withdrawal Agreement by 22 May 2019. As the United Kingdom had not ratified the Withdrawal Agreement by 22 May 2019, it held European elections on 23 May 2019.
A third country is a country not member of the EU.
In addition, if the Withdrawal Agreement is ratified by both parties before that date, the withdrawal takes place on the first day of the month following the completion of the ratification procedures.
Agreement on the withdrawal of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland from the European Union and the European Atomic Energy Community, OJ C 144 I, 25
.2019, p. 1

Subject to the transition period provided for in the Withdrawal Agreement,
as of the withdrawal date the EU regulatory framework for the .eu Top Level Domain, and in particular Regulation (EC) No 733/2002 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 April 2002 on the implementation of the .eu Top Level Domain,
9 will no longer apply to the United Kingdom. This has in particular the following consequences:10 1.
EGISTRATION AND RENEWAL OF DOMAIN NAMES According to Article 4(2)(b) of Regulation (EC) No 733/2002, as amended by Regulation (EU) 2019/517, as of 19 October 2019 the following persons are eligible to register .eu domain names:  (i) a Union citizen, independently of their place of residence; (ii) a natural person who is not a Union citizen and who is a resident of a Member State; (iii) an undertaking that is established in the Union; or (iv) an organisation that is established in the Union, without prejudice to the application of national law. As of the withdrawal date, undertakings and organisations that are established in the United Kingdom but not in the EU and third country nationals (i.e. non-EU-27 citizens) who reside in the United Kingdom will no longer be eligible to register .eu domain name
or, if they are .eu registrants
to renew .eu domain name
registered before the withdrawal date
Accredited .eu Registrars will not be entitled to process any request for the registration of or for renewing registrations of .eu domain names by those undertakings, organisations and persons.  2.
EVOCATION OF REGISTERED DOMAIN NAMES Where, as of the withdrawal date and as a result of the withdrawal of the United Kingdom, a holder of a domain name does no longer fulfil the general eligibility
It is recalled that, in order for the transition period to apply, the Withdrawal Agreement has to be ratified by the EU and the United Kingdom
8
OJ L 113, 30.4.2002, p. 1
9
Please note that Article 4(2) of Regulation (EC) No 733/2002 is amended, with effect of 19 October 2019, by Regulation (EU) 2019/517 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 19 March 2019 on the implementation and functioning of the .eu top-level domain name and amending and repealing Regulation (EC) No 733/2002 and repealing Commission Regulation (EC) No 874/2004, OJ L 91, 29.3.2019, p. 25
10
Regulation (EC) No 733/2002 does not require.eu domain names registrar
to be established in the EU. However, other applicable EU rules may affect them. For more information, for instance on electronic commerce and net neutrality
please refer to the relevant "Notices to stakeholders" here: https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness_en

criteria pursuant to Article 4(2)(b) of Regulation (EC) 733/2002, the Registry for .eu will be entitled to revoke such domain name on its own initiative and without submitting the dispute to any extrajudicial settlement of conflicts in accordance with point (b) of the first paragraph of Article 20 of Commission Regulation (EC) No 874/200411
3.
IGHTS THAT CAN BE INVOKED IN PROCEDURES FOR THE REVOCATION OF SPECULATIVE AND ABUSIVE REGISTRATIONS According to Article 21(1) of Regulation (EC) 874/2004, a registered domain name shall be subject to revocation, using an appropriate extra-judicial or judicial procedure, where that name is identical or confusingly similar to a name in respect of which a right is recognised or established by national and/or Union law and where the registered domain name was the subject of speculative and abusive registration as described in that Article
As of the withdrawal date, rights recognised or established by the United Kingdom, but not by EU-27 Member States or by the Union, can no longer be invoked in procedures under Article 21(1). By contrast, rights recognised by the Member States or by the Union, arising from international instruments, like rights arising from Article 6bis of the Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property and Article 16(2) and (3) of the Agreement on Trade-related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights, are not affected. 4.
PPLICABLE LAW IN AGREEMENTS BETWEEN ACCREDITED .EU REGISTRARS AND .EU REGISTRANTS In accordance with the first paragraph of Article 5 of Regulation (EC) No 874/2004, agreements between the Registrar and the registrant of a .eu domain name cannot designate, as applicable law, a law other than the law of a EU Member State, nor can they designate a dispute-resolution body, unless selected by the .eu Top Level Domain Registry pursuant to Article 23 of that Regulation, nor an arbitration court or a court located outside the EU. [alinéa en français
Should any such agreement designate as applicable law the law of the United Kingdom, the Registrar and registrant concerned are advised to amend the relevant agreement accordingly so that it complies with the first paragraph of Article 5 of Regulation (EC) No 874/2004 as of the withdrawal date.
The website
of the Commission on the EU rules for the digital single market (https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/the-top-level-domain-.eu and http://ec.europa.eu/ipg/basics/urls/doteu_en.htm
provide general information on the rules concerning the Top Level Domain .eu. These pages will be updated with further information, where necessary.                                                    11
Commission Regulation (EC) No 874/2004 of 28 April 2004 laying down public policy rules concerning the implementation and functions of the .eu Top Level Domain and the principles governing registration (OJ L 162, 30.4.2004, p. 40).
4
European Commission
irectorate
eneral for Communications Networks, Content and Technology
EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL COMMUNICATIONS NETWORKS, CONTENT AND TECHNOLOGY
Brussels, 28 March 2018 Rev1
OTICE TO STAKEHOLDER
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND EU RULES IN THE FIELD OF COPYRIGHT The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. This means that
unless a ratified withdrawal agreement
establishes another date, all Union primary and secondary law will cease to apply to the United Kingdom from 30 March 2019, 00:00h (CET) ('the withdrawal date').
The United Kingdom will then become a 'third country'.
Preparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for EU and national authorities but also for private parties. In view of the considerable uncertainties, in particular concerning the content of a possible withdrawal agreement, persons concerned are reminded of legal repercussions, which need to be considered when the United Kingdom becomes a third country. Subject to any transitional arrangement that may be contained in a possible withdrawal agreement, as of the withdrawal date, the EU rules in the field of copyright will no longer apply to the United Kingdom.  1.
HE MAIN INTERNATIONAL (MULTILATERAL
COPYRIGHT TREATIES WILL GOVERN THE EU
NITED KINGDOM RELATIONSHIP IN THE FIELD OF COPYRIGHT  The United Kingdom and the EU are contracting parties to many of the main international (multilateral) copyright treaties, such as the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) Copyright Treaty (WCT), the WIPO Performances and Phonograms Treaty (WPPT)
and the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS)


Negotiations are ongoing with the United Kingdom with a view to reaching a withdrawal agreement.
Furthermore, in accordance with Article 50(3) of the Treaty on European Union, the European Council, in agreement with the United Kingdom, may unanimously decide that the Treaties cease to apply at a later date.
A third country is a country not member of the EU.
http://www.wipo.int/treaties/en/
https://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/trips_e/trips_e.htm

In accordance with the obligations under these agreements and in particular the principles of 'national treatment'  and 'most favoured nation' of nationals and legal persons that meet the criteria of eligibility for protection within the scope of the TRIP
Agreement, the international framework will govern
s of the withdrawal date:   the protection of copyright and related rights (e.g. exclusive rights of reproduction, distribution, rental, communication and making available for authors
and where applicable also to holders of related rights, such as phonogram producers, performers and broadcasting organisations);  the term of protection of copyright and certain related rights;  obligations concerning technological protection measures and rights management information
databases, except as set out below;  computer programs;  semiconductor topographies
enforcement of copyright (as one of the intellectual property rights in part
of TRIPS)
including border measures
It should be noted that the multilateral international agreements mentioned above do not provide for the same type or level of protection in relation to certain rights and where applicable exceptions or limitations to those rights as that set out today in the EU copyright acquis. In addition, the EU acquis provides for certain forms of lex specialis or particular cross-border measures for the benefit of rightholders or users in the internal market and/or the management of rights which have no counterpart in the international conventions.  Against this background, the withdrawal of the United Kingdom will have in particular the following consequences in the field of the copyright and related rights
2.
PECIFIC CONSEQUENCES IN THE FIELD OF COPYRIGHT  Broadcasters: Directive 93/83/EEC on the coordination of certain rules concerning copyright and rights related to copyright applicable to satellite broadcasting and cable retransmission
provides inter alia that the act of communication to the public by satellite occurs solely in the Member State where the broadcast signals are introduced, thus localising the copyright relevant acts for the purpose of licensing. Consequently, in order to broadcast a work or other subject matter, broadcasters only have to clear rights in the Member State where the signal is introduced. As of the withdrawal date,
The United Kingdom is furthermore a party to the Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works, which the EU is not. However, the EU is required pursuant to Article 1(4) WCT to apply Article 1-21 and the Appendix of the Berne Convention.
Council Directive 93/83/EEC of 27 September 1993 on the coordination of certain rules concerning        copyright and rights related to copyright applicable to satellite broadcasting and cable retransmission, OJ L 248, 6.10.1993, p. 15.
3 broadcasters in the United Kingdom will no longer benefit from the mechanism provided for by the Directive when providing cross-border satellite broadcasting services to EU customers and they will have to clear rights in all Member States where the signal reaches. Correspondingly, broadcasters in the EU will no longer be able to benefit from the mechanism provided for by the Directive when providing cross-border satellite broadcasting services to customers in the United Kingdom and they will have to secure clearance of the rights of all relevant rightholders if they wish to broadcast to the United Kingdom.  Collective Rights Management (online rights in musical works): Article 30 of Directive 2014/26/EU on collective management of copyright and related rights and multi-territorial licensing of rights in musical works for online use in the internal market
provides for an obligation on a collective management organisation to represent another collective management organisation for multi-territorial licensing (for the online rights in musical works) in certain cases. As of the withdrawal date, EU collective management organisations will not be subject to the obligation to represent collective management organisations based in the United Kingdom for multi-territorial licensing in accordance with Article 30 of Directive 2014/26/EU and vice versa.  Orphan Works: Certain cultural institutions in the EU can benefit from a system of mutual recognition of orphan works in Directive 2012/28/EU on certain permitted uses of orphan works.
This system allows them to digitise and make a work available online in all Member States once it is recognised as an orphan work in one Member State.  As of the withdrawal date, the mechanism of mutual recognition provided for by Directive 2012/28/EU will no longer apply between the United Kingdom and the EU. Consequently, orphan works which have been recognised in the United Kingdom by the withdrawal date will no longer be recognised in the EU under Directive 2012/28/EU and the same will apply for orphan works recognised in the EU, as the system of mutual recognition under Directive 2012/28/EU will no longer be available in the United Kingdom
As a consequence, this means that the uses of orphan works from the United Kingdom allowed under the Directive, notably as regards making them available online, will no longer be allowed for cultural institutions in the EU and vice versa.
Access to published works for persons who are blind, visually impaired or otherwise print-disabled: Directive (EU) 2017/1564 on certain permitted uses of certain works and other subject matter protected by copyright and related rights for the benefit of persons who are blind, visually impaired or otherwise print-disabled10
Directive 2014/26/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 February 2014 on collective management of copyright and related rights and multi-territorial licensing of rights in musical works for online use in the internal market, OJ L 84, 20.3.2014, p. 72.
Directive 2012/28/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 October 2012 on certain permitted uses of orphan works, OJ L 299, 27.10.2012, p. 5. 10
Directive (EU) 2017/1564 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 September 2017 on certain permitted uses of certain works and other subject matter protected by copyright and related rights for the benefit of persons who are blind, visually impaired or otherwise print-disabled, OJ L 242, 20.9.2017, p. 6. This Directive must be transposed by 11 October 2018.
4 introduces a mandatory exception for the benefit of persons who are blind, visually impaired or otherwise print-disabled and authorised entities operating on behalf of these persons. The Directive furthermore provides that such authorised entities may rely on the exception for a beneficiary person or another authorised entity in other Member States and that beneficiary person
and authorised entities may have access to accessible format copies from an authorised entity established in any Member State.  As of the withdrawal date, persons in the United Kingdom will no longer be able to obtain accessible format copies from authorised entities in the EU under the framework provided for by Directive (EU) 2017/1564. Conversely, authorised entities and beneficiary persons in the EU will not be able to obtain accessible format copies from authorised entities in the United Kingdom either. The exchange of accessible format copies between the EU and third countries that have ratified the Marrakesh Treaty11 is governed by Regulation (EU) 2017/156312 on the cross-border exchange between the EU and third countries of accessible format copies of certain works and other subject matter protected by copyright and related rights for the benefit of persons who are blind, visually impaired or otherwise print-disabled. In this context it is important to note, that the United Kingdoms is currently not a party to the Marrakesh Treaty.  Online content Portability: Regulation (EU) 2017/1128 on cross-border portability of online content services in the internal market13
stablishes that the provision of an online content service to a subscriber who is temporarily present in a Member State, as well as the access to and the use of that service by the subscriber, shall be deemed to occur solely in the e of residence.
As of the withdrawal date
persons residing in the United Kingdom will no longer benefit from their digital content subscriptions when travelling to the EU; and a provider of online content services established in the United Kingdom will need to comply with the rules of the relevant EU Member State or States where it wishes to offer services to its subscribers  including the need to clear all relevant rights for that or those Member States.  Sui generis database right: Article 7 of Directive 96/9/EC on the legal protection of databases14 grants under certain conditions protection to the makers of databases in the EU Member States ('sui generis database right'). Article 11 of Directive 96/9/EC restricts the beneficiaries of protection under the sui generis right to the database                                                  11
Marrakesh Treaty to Facilitate Access to Published Works for Persons Who Are Blind, Visually Impaired or Otherwise Print Disabled
12
Regulation (EU) 2017/1563 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 September 2017 on the cross-border exchange between the Union and third countries of accessible format copies of certain works and other subject matter protected by copyright and related rights for the benefit of persons who are blind, visually impaired or otherwise print-disabled, OJ L 242, 20.9.2017, p. 1. The Regulation will apply as of 12 October 2018. 13
Regulation (EU) 2017/1128 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 14 June 2017 on cross-border portability of online content services in the internal market, OJ L 168, 30.6.2017, p. 1. This Regulation will apply from 1 April 2018. 14
Directive 96/9/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 March 1996 on the legal protection of databases, OJ L 77, 27.3.1996, p. 20.
5 makers (or rightholders) that are nationals of an EU Member State, have their habitual residence in the territory of the EU or are companies/firms formed in accordance with the law of an EU Member State (and having their registered office, central administration or principal place of business within the EU).  As of the withdrawal date, United Kingdom nationals (unless they have their habitual residence in the EU) and companies/firms formed in accordance with the law of the United Kingdom will no longer be entitled to maintain or obtain a sui generis database right in respect of databases in the EU.15 Conversely, EU Member States nationals and companies/firms will not be entitled to maintain or obtain a sui generis database right in respect of databases in the United Kingdom.
The website of the European Commission regarding the Digital Single Market provide
general information concerning copyright: https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/policies/copyright. These pages will be updated with further information, where necessary.
European Commission Directorate-General Communications Networks, Content and Technology                                                  15
For databases protected before the withdrawal date, the EU is trying to agree solutions with the United Kingdom in the withdrawal agreement. The essential principles of the EU's position on Intellectual property rights (including geographical indications) are available here: https://ec.europa.eu/commission/publications/position-paper-intellectual-property-rights-including-geographical-indications_en

EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL FOR COMPETITION
Brussels, 25 March 2019
OTICE TO STAKEHOLDER
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND EU COMPETITION LAW The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union . On 22 March 2019, the European Council (Article 50) decided, in agreement with the United Kingdom, and in the event that the Withdrawal Agreement is approved by the House of Commons by 29 March 2019, to extend the 2-years period provided for in Article 50(3) TEU until 22 May 2019.  In the event that the Withdrawal Agreement is not approved by the House of Commons by 29 March 2019, the European Council decided to extend the period provided for in Article 50(3) TEU until 12 April 2019. This means that as from 13 April 2019, 00:00h
Preparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for EU and national authorities but also for private parties.  In view of the uncertainties surrounding the ratification of the Withdrawal Agreement, all interested parties, and especially economic operators, are reminded of legal repercussions, which need to be considered when the United Kingdom becomes a third country. Subject to the transition period provided for in the Withdrawal Agreement,
as of the withdrawal date, the United Kingdom will become a third country as regards the application of EU competition rules3.  This notice provides some guidance only on the main implications that can be foreseen in a no deal scenario for the application of EU competition law (antitrust, merger control).4
A third country is a country not member of the EU.
Cf. Part four of the Agreement on the withdrawal of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland from the European Union and the European Atomic Energy Community (OJ, C 66 I, 19.2.2019, p. 1

Until the United Kingdom withdraws, however, EU competition law remains fully applicable in the United Kingdom, as in any other Member State.
This is an informal document of the services of DG Competition and it does not create or affect legal rights nor does it bind the European Commission.
2 1. EU ANTITRUST ENFORCEMEN
EU antitrust enforcement is governed by Articles 101 and 102 of the Treaty on the Regulation (EC) No 1/2003,
and Regulation (EC) No 773/2004.
This legal framework is complemented by other Regulations dealing with particular types of conduct or with specific sectors, as well as the guidance provided in various decisions,
notices and guidelines adopted by Courts.
Territorial application of EU competition law The territorial application of EU antitrust rules is defined in Articles 101 and 102 ts country of incorporation or where its headquarters are located, and may also cover conduct occurring outside of the EU. The Court of Justice has held that the fact that an undertaking participating in an agreement is situated in a third country does not prevent the application of the TFEU, if that agreement is operative on the territory of the internal market9. For conduct occurring outside the EU, the Commission's jurisdiction can be justified under public international law either on the basis of the implementation of conduct in the EU10 or on the basis of the qualified effects doctrine in the EU.11
Hence, the fact that the United Kingdom will become a third country following its withdrawal, will not have as such an impact on the applicability of the EU antitrust rules to UK companies. As any other company registered or headquartered in a third country, a UK company will be subject to EU antitrust rules if its anticompetitive conduct is implemented or produces effects in the EU. This applies to public undertakings and undertakings enjoying special or exclusive rights located or established in the United Kingdom.
Council Regulation (EC) No 1/2003, of 16 December 2002 on the implementation of the rules on competition laid down in Articles [101
and [102
of the Treaty, OJ L1, 4.1.2003, p. 1.
Commission Regulation (EC) No 773/2004 of 7 April 2004 relating to the conduct of proceedings by the Commission pursuant to Articles [101
and [102
of the Treaty, OJ L123, 27.4.2004, p. 18.
Decision 2011/695/E
of the President of the European Commission of 13 October 2011 on the function and terms of reference of the hearing officer in certain competition proceedings, OJ L 275, 20.10.2011, p. 29.
For an overview of the legislation and the various notices and guidelines, see http://ec.europa.eu/competition/antitrust/legislation/legislation.html
9
See for example
udgment of the Court of Justice of 25 November 1971, Béguelin Import, 22/71, ECLI:EU:C:1971:113, paragraph 11. 10
Judgment of the Court of Justice of 27 September 1988, Ahlström Osakeyhtiö and Others v Commission, joined cases 89/85, 104/85, 114/85, 116/85, 117/85 and 125/85 to 129/85, ECLI:EU:C:1988:447, paragraph 16.
11
Judgment of the Court of Justice of
September 2017, Intel Corp. v Commission,
413/14
, ECLI:EU:C:2017:632, paragraphs 43-47.
3 Specific issues in the enforcement of EU antitrust rules following the United Kingdom's withdrawal The Commission will continue to exercise its jurisdiction on agreements or conduct affecting competition within the internal market. The jurisdiction of the United Kingdom over such practices pursuant to its own national antitrust rules may also be applicable in parallel.  Consequence on the Commission's investigative powers and validity of Commission decisions The Commission will no longer be able to carry out inspections under Article 20 of Regulation (EC) No 1/2003 in the United Kingdom. The Commission will still be able to obtain information under Article 18 of Regulation (EC) No 1/2003.   All Commission decisions adopted under Articles 101 and 102 TFEU before the United Kingdom's withdrawal from the EU will remain valid.  2. EU MERGER CONTROL
EU merger control is governed by the EU Merger Regulation 12 and its Implementing Regulation.13 This legal framework is complemented by guidance case law.14 The EUMR establishes an ex ante control system, in which certain types of transactions with specific turnover thresholds have to obtain the Commission's approval before the parties involved are allowed to implement them. If the Commission has jurisdiction over a transaction under the EUMR, Member States are no longer allowed to apply their national competition laws to this transaction. They may, however, take appropriate measures to protect legitimate interests other than those taken into consideration by the EUMR, under the conditions provided for in Article 21 thereof.  The exclusive jurisdiction of the Commission in the EU under the EUMR is also referred to as the "one-stop-shop principle". As for antitrust rules, the EU merger control system applies regardless of the nationality or country of incorporation or where the headquarters of a company are located. Hence, the fact that the United Kingdom will become a third country following its withdrawal from the EU, will not have an impact on the applicability of the EUMR to UK companies when the jurisdictional criteria of the EUMR are fulfilled.                                                   12
Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004 of 20 January 2004 on the control of concentrations between undertakings, OJ L 24, 29.1.2004, p. 1.  13
Commission Regulation (EC) No 802/2004 of 21 April 2004 implementing Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004 on the control of concentrations between undertakings and its annexes (Form CO, Short Form CO, Form RS and Form RM) (OJ L 133, 30.4.2004, p. 1), as amended by Commission Regulation (EC) No 1033/2008 (OJ L 279, 22.10.2008, p. 3
and by Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) No 1269/2013
OJ
336, 14.12.2013, p. 1
14
For an overview of the various notices and guidelines, see
http://ec.europa.eu/competition/mergers/legislation/legislation.html

It is possible that both the Commission and the UK national competition authority will be competent to review in parallel a planned concentration but under their respective substantive and jurisdictional rules on merger control.15 Therefore, companies will no longer benefit from the one-stop-shop principle in that regard. Specific issues concerning the assessment of the Commission's jurisdiction  The relevant date for establishing EU jurisdiction over a concentration pursuant to Articles 1 and 3 EUMR is the date of the conclusion of the binding legal agreement, the announcement of a public bid or the acquisition of a controlling interest or the date of the first merger notification, whichever date is earlier16. These rules are not altered by the United Kingdom's departure from the EU. If any of the relevant events takes place prior to the United Kingdom's withdrawal, the Commission will assess whether the jurisdictional test of the EUMR is met on the date of that event.
If the relevant date for establishing EU jurisdiction takes place after the United Kingdom's withdrawal, the Commission will no longer take into account the turnover that the parties to the concentration realise in the United Kingdom, when establishing the relevant EU-wide turnover and the relevant turnover realised in individual Member States.17
Specific jurisdictional issues over concentrations without EU dimension following a referral As regards the Commission's jurisdiction following a referral of a concentration without EU dimension, a distinction needs to be drawn between pre-notification referrals pursuant to Article 4(5) EUMR, and post-notification referrals pursuant to Article 22 EUMR.
Pre-notification referrals pursuant to Article 4(5) EUMR Under Article 4(5) EUMR the notifying party or parties may make a reasoned submission that a concentration without a Union dimension be reviewed by the Commission, provided that the concentration is capable of being reviewed under the national competition laws of at least three Member States. Any competent Member State may object within 15 working days. In instances where an Article 4(5) submission has been made prior to the withdrawal date and where a concentration without Union dimension is capable of being reviewed in three Member States, amongst which the United Kingdom, the Commission will acquire jurisdiction under Article 4(5) EUMR if, prior to the United Kingdom's withdrawal, the period                                                  15
As is the case now for transactions which are reviewed by the Commission and third-country competition agencies. 16
See paragraph 156 of the Consolidated Jurisdictional Notice under Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004 on the control of concentrations between undertakings, OJ C95 of 16.4.2008, p. 1
17
This may result in some transactions that would have met the EUMR thresholds, if the UK turnover of the undertakings concerned were to be included, not being notifiable; for example where the target undertaking does not realise a turnover of at least EUR 250 million in the EU without counting its turnover in the United Kingdom.
5 of 15 working days has elapsed without any competent Member State expressing its disagreement.
The fact that a concentration is capable of being reviewed in the United Kingdom will no longer be relevant for the application of Article 4(5) EUMR for submissions made after its withdrawal.
Post-notification referrals pursuant to Article 22 EUMR After its withdrawal, the United Kingdom will no longer be empowered to refer cases to the Commission or to join referral requests by other Member States under Article 22 EUMR. If the United Kingdom has requested the referral or joined a referral request by another Member State prior to its withdrawal and the Commission has decided (or is deemed to have decided) to examine the concentration in accordance with Article 22(3) EUMR before the withdrawal date, the case will be considered to be referred also with respect to the United Kingdom. If not, the case will not be considered to be referred in relation to the United Kingdom. Substantive assessment As from the withdrawal date and if the Withdrawal Agreement is not ratified, the Commission will have to take account of the fact that the United Kingdom will no longer be part of the internal market. This implies that the Commission will no longer be competent to find that a planned concentration would (or would not) significantly impede effective competition in UK national or subnational markets. Moreover, trade between the EU and the United Kingdom may become subject to new tariffs and non-tariff barriers. This competitive assessment including the suitability and viability of remedies where a concentration leads to competition concerns. The respective consequences will have to be assessed individually for each case concerned and merging parties are invited -General for Competition. Inspections pursuant to Article 13 EUMR will no longer be possible in the United Kingdom. The Commission will still be able to obtain information under Article 11 EUMR. Continued validity of Commission decisions under the EUMR after the United  All Commission decisions under the EUMR (including decisions imposing conditions and obligations) remain valid after the United Kingdom's withdrawal. For the sake of clarity, no distinction should be drawn between decisions that relate to the effect of a concentration on competition at the level of the European Economic Area or within any of the remaining 27 EU Member States, and Commission decisions that relate to the effect of a concentration in UK national or sub-national markets. The decision will in principle remain valid also in instances
where commitments address a competition issue only affecting a UK national or sub-national market.18   Following the United Kingdom's withdrawal, parties may in certain circumstances consider requesting the Commission to waive, modify or substitute certain commitments under the standard review clause that is typically contained in commitments.19 Requests may be considered founded in instances where the commitments in question address competition issues in UK markets only (or markets including only the United Kingdom and a third country). The services of the Commission's Directorate-General for Competition will be available for guidance in individual cases.
The Commission website on EU Competition law
http://ec.europa.eu/competition/index_en.html) provide additional information. These pages will be updated with further information, where necessary.
European Commission Directorate-General for Competition                                                  18
Indeed, at the time of taking the decision, the Commission had jurisdiction and therefore the obligation to seek a remedy to address a competition concerns in the United Kingdom, while the UK national competition authority did not have jurisdiction to do so, remains in place.  19
See Section F  The review clause of the Commission's Model text for divestiture commitments, available at http://ec.europa.eu/competition/mergers/legislation/legislation.html.
EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL EMPLOYMENT, SOCIAL AFFAIRS AND INCLUSION

Brussels, 13 March 2019 REV2  replaces the Notice REV1 published on 28 March 2018
NOTICE TO STAKEHOLDERS
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND EU RULES ON EUROPEAN WORKS COUNCILS
he United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. This means that as from 30 March 2019, 00:00h (CET) ('the withdrawal date')1, the United Kingdom will be a 'third country'.
Preparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for EU and national authorities but also for private parties.  In view of the uncertainties surrounding the ratification of the Withdrawal Agreement
all interested parties, and especially economic operators
are reminded of legal repercussions, which need to be considered when the United Kingdom becomes a third country
Subject to the transition period provided for in the Withdrawal Agreement,
as of the withdrawal date, the EU rules in the field of information and consultation of workers at transnational level, in particular Directive 2009/38/EC on European Works Councils
will no longer apply to the United Kingdom. This has in particular the following consequences


n accordance with Article 50(3) of the Treaty on European Union, the European Council, in agreement with the United Kingdom, may unanimously decide that the Treaties cease to apply at a later date.
A third country is a country not member of the EU.
Cf. Part four of the Agreement on the withdrawal of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland from the European Union and the European Atomic Energy Community (OJ, C 66 I, 19.2.2019, p. 1

Directive 2009/38/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 6 May 2009 on the establishment of a European Works Council or a procedure in Community-scale undertakings and Community-scale groups of undertakings for the purposes of informing and consulting employees (OJ L 122, 16.5.2009, p. 28

This notice does not address issues of European company law, and in particular the consequences of the withdrawal of the UK as regards European company law forms. For these matters, reference is
1.
HRESHOLDS FOR APPLYING DIRECTIVE 2009/38/EC Directive 2009/38/EC sets out the conditions for setting up European Works Councils as well as their functioning and potential dissolution. In particular, Article
of Directive 2009/38/EC -000 employees within the Member States and at least 150 employees in each of at least mmunity-undertakings with the following characteristics:   at least 1 000 employees within the Member States,  at least two group undertakings in different Member States, and  at least one group undertaking with at least 150 employees in one Member State and at least one other group undertaking with at least 150 employees in another Member State As of the withdrawal date, for the purpose of determining whether there is a Community-scale undertaking or a Community-scale group of undertakings to which Directive 2009/38/EC applies, the United Kingdom will no longer be counted as a Member State and employees in the United Kingdom will no longer count as employees within the Member States.
As a consequence, should the relevant thresholds no longer be met due to the United longer be subject to the rights and obligations stemming from the application of Directive 2009/38/EC. That works council may continue to function under the relevant national law, but not as a European Works Council within the meaning of Directive 2009/38/EC. Since Directive 2009/38/EC allows for the participation of representatives from third countries in European Works Councils6, representatives from the United Kingdom will be able to take part in European Works Councils, where the relevant agreement referred to in Article 6 of  Directive 2009/38/EC so provides.  The withdrawal of the United Kingdom may also impact
he duty on the part of the central management to initiate negotiations for the establishment of a European Works Council or an information and consultation procedure which presupposes a written request of at least 100 employees or their representatives in at least two undertakings or establishments in at least two different Member States (Article 5(1) of Directive 2009/38/EC).  2.
OCATION REQUIREMENTS FOR CENTRAL MANAGEMENT/CENTRAL MANAGEMENTS REPRESENTATIVE According to Article 4(1),(2) of Directive 2009/38/EC, the central management or the                                                                                                                                                  made to the Notice to stakeholders
Withdrawal of the United Kingdom and EU rules on company law
https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness_en

See Article 1(6) read in conjunction with Article 6(2)(a) of Directive 2009/38/EC

the withdrawal date, for those European Works Councils for which the thresholds in Article 2 of Directive 2009/38/EC continue to be met and which have their central management or their representative agent in the United Kingdom, the role of central management will be transferred to a Member State. For such European Works Councils, unless they designate a new representative agent in a Member State, this role will be assumed by the establishment or group undertaking employing the greatest number of pursuant to Article 4(3) of Directive 2009/38/EC. This responsibility is transferred automatically and immediately as of the withdrawal date. 3.
PPLICABLE LAW TO THE AGREEMENT REFERRED TO IN ARTICLE
OF DIRECTIVE 2009/38/EC The law applicable to the agreement referred to in Article 6 of Directive 2009/38/EC is that  Where the law of the United Kingdom has applied to an existing European Works Council, as of the withdrawal date the law of a remaining Member State will apply automatically and immediately to ensure that the rights of employees under Directive 2009/38/EC remain enforceable within the Union.  While it is thus not necessary from a legal point of view to amend agreements referring to the legislation of the United Kingdom to remain in conformity with Directive 2009/38/EC, it is highly recommended to amend such agreements and stipulate explicitly the law of a Member State for the sake of clarity and legal certainty (see below, section 5 of this notice). 4.
THER ASPECTS
he withdrawal of the United Kingdom may also be decisive for

2009/38/EC)

he members of the special negotiating body to be elected or appointed in proportion to the number of employees employed in each Member State by the Community-scale undertaking or Community-scale group of undertakings, by allocating in respect of each Member State one seat per portion of employees employed in that Member State amounting to 10 %, or a fraction thereof, of the number of employees employed in all the Member States taken together (Article 5(2)(b) of Directive 2009/38/EC)
5.
GREEMENTS IN ACCORDANCE WITH ARTICLE
OF DIRECTIVE 2009/38/EC According to Article 6 of Directive 2009/38/EC, the setting up and functioning of European Works Councils rely on an agreement negotiated at company level by the social partners. These agreements should take the abovementioned consequences into account.

Article 13 of Directive 2009/38/EC provides for a procedure for amending the agreement. The withdrawal of the United Kingdom may lead to a significant change of -scale -scale group of  in the sense of this provision.
The website of the Commission on labour law
http://ec.europa.eu/social/main.jsp?catId=157) provide
general information concerning the field of information and consultation of workers at transnational level. These pages will be updated with further information, where necessary.
European Commission Directorate-General Employment, Social Affairs and Inclusion
EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL FOR INTERNAL MARKET, INDUSTRY, ENTREPRENEURSHIP AND SMES DIRECTORATE-GENERAL FOR TRADE
DIRECTORATE-GENERAL EMPLOYMENT, SOCIAL AFFAIRS AND INCLUSION
DIRECTORATE-GENERAL MIGRATION AND HOME AFFAIRS
Brussels, 28 June 2019
OTICE TO STAKEHOLDER
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND EU RULES ON THE PROVISION OF SERVICES AND POSTING OF WORKERS The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union (TEU). Following
request by the United Kingdom, the European Council (Article 50) agreed on 11 April 2019
to extend further
the period provided for in Article 50(3) TEU until 31 October 2019.
This means that the United Kingdom will be, as of 1 November 2019
a third country

Preparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for EU and national authorities but also for private parties. In view of the uncertainties surrounding the ratification of the Withdrawal Agreement, all interested parties, and especially economic operators, are reminded of legal repercussions, which need to be considered when the United Kingdom becomes a third country
Subject to the transition period provided for in the Withdrawal Agreement,
as of the withdrawal date the EU rules on the provision of services as well as the provision
on the posting of workers, and in particular Directive 96/71/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 December 1996 concerning the posting of workers in the framework
European Council Decision (EU) 2019/584, OJ L 101, 11.4.2019, p. 1.
Following a request by the United Kingdom, the European Council had decided a first extension on 22 March 2019 (European Council Decision (EU) 2019/476, OJ L 80 I, 22.3.2019, p. 1).
On 11 April 2019, following a second request for an extension by the United Kingdom, the European Council also decided that the decision to extend until 31 October 2019 would cease to apply on 31 May 2019 if the United Kingdom had not held elections to the European Parliament and had not ratified the Withdrawal Agreement by 22 May 2019. As the United Kingdom had not ratified the Withdrawal Agreement by 22 May 2019, it held European elections on 23 May 2019.
A third country is a country not member of the EU.
In addition, if the Withdrawal Agreement is ratified by both parties before that date, the withdrawal takes place on the first day of the month following the completion of the ratification procedures.
Cf. Part four of the Agreement on the withdrawal of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland from the European Union and the European Atomic Energy Community (OJ C 144 I, 25
.2019, p. 1

of the provision of services,
no longer apply to the United Kingdom. This has in particular the following consequences
Please note: this notice does not address sectorial EU legislation on the provision of services, such as EU legislation on financial services, transport services, digital services, and business services. are available here: https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness/preparedness-notices_en
Moreover, this notice does not address:
- EU company law;

- the right to reside in the EU-27 of UK nationals lawfully residing in the EU-27 at the time of the withdrawal of the United Kingdom
as well as general immigration law in the EU

- entry conditions for short-term stays in the EU;10
the recognition of professional qualifications when providing services in the EU;11
- indirect taxation (value added tax  VAT) of services supplied in the EU.12
1.
REEDOM TO PROVIDE SERVICES The freedom to provide services, as set out in Article 56 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU)
applies to
legal persons established in an EU Member State other than that of the legal or natural person for whom the services are intended; or
natural persons who EU nationalsresiding in an EU Member State other than that of the legal or natural person for whom the services are intended.13
OJ L 18, 21.1.1997, p. 1
8
Notice to stakeholders
Withdrawal of the United Kingdom and EU rules in the field of EU company law(https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/file_import/company_law_en.pdf

See the overview on national law in relation to the residence rights drawn up by Commission services
https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness/residence-rights-uk-nationals-eu-member-states_en). 10
otice on travelling between the EU and the United Kingdom following withdrawal of the United Kingdom from the EUhttps://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/file_import/travelling_en.pdf). 11
Notice to stakeholders
ithdrawal of the United Kingdom and EU rules in the field of regulated professions and the recognition of professional qualifications(https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/file_import/professional_qualifications_en.pdf). 12
Notice to stakeholder
Withdrawal of the United Kingdom and EU rules in the field of value added tax
https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/vat_en.pdf).
3 As of the withdrawal date, the following (legal and natural) persons no longer benefit from the freedom to provide services in the EU, as set out in Article 56 TFEU:
legal persons established in the United Kingdom, unless the legal person has an establishment also in the EU-27 (see below)
- UK national
and EU-27 nationals residing in the United Kingdom; and
UK national
residing in an EU-27 Member State. Rather, as of the withdrawal date
those legal and natural persons will only be able to provide services in an EU-27 Member State under the conditions set out by the law of such Member State, taking into account the market access commitments and qualifications made by the EU in the framework of the General Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS).14
Moreover, according to the first paragraph of Article 54 TFEU, legal persons established in the EU-27 owned by UK nationals and having their registered office, central administration or principal place of business in the EU-27 will benefit from the freedom to provide services in the EU-27. 2.
OSTING OF WORKERS IN THE FRAMEWORK OF THE PROVISION OF SERVICE
Directive 96/71/EC provides for a legal framework that applies to undertakings established in an EU Member State
which post workers to another EU Member State. As of the withdrawal date
Directive 96/71/EC no longer applies to
EU-27 undertakings posting workers to the United Kingdom; and
UK undertakings posting workers to the EU-27. Rather, in these cases, as of the withdrawal date the following applies:
national law of the EU-27 Member State
taking into account also the commitments and qualifications made by the EU and the UK in the framework of the GATS in relation to the temporary presence of certain categories of natural persons in the EU-27 to supply services;15
13
The second paragraph of Article 56 TFEU provides the possibility for the European Parliament and the Council ry who provide services and who are established within the Union. However, this possibility has not been used so far. 14
The commitments and qualifications
are accessible here: https://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/serv_e/serv_commitments_e.htm
15
The commitments and qualifications are accessible here: https://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/serv_e/serv_commitments_e.htm

- Article 1(4) of Directive 96/71/EC, which provides that Member States must not give more favourable treatment to undertakings established in a third country than to undertakings established in the EU
As of the withdrawal date, Member States must therefore ensure that territory by undertakings established in the United Kingdom are granted at least the terms and conditions of employment applicable to workers posted to that Member State by an undertaking established in the EU
- As regards the specific case of intra-corporate transfers, Directive 2014/66/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 May 2014 on the conditions of entry and residence of third-country nationals in the framework of an intra-corporate transfer16 will become relevant for UK companies: The Directive harmonizes the conditions for entry, stay and intra-EU mobility of third-country national workers being posted by a group of undertakings based outside the EU to an entity of the same group based on the EU territory. The Directive covers stays of up to 3 years for managers and specialists and up to 1 year for trainees
Directive 96/71/EC continues to apply in the event that an EU-27 company posts a UK national who is legally residing and working in an EU-27 Member State to another EU-27 Member State, without prejudice to national laws relating to the entry, residence and access to employment of third-country workers to the extent that these laws comply with EU law.17 According to the Vander Elst case-law of the CJEU,18 it constitutes a restriction of the freedom to provide services by a Member State (host country) to make third-country workers who are regularly and habitually employed by a service provider established in another Member State and who are posted to the first Member State subject to administrative formalities, such as the obligation to obtain a work permit. Such a restriction complies with the freedom to provide services only if it is justified on the basis of a legitimate public interest and proportionate.
The website
of the Commission on EU trade policy (http://ec.europa.eu/trade/), the posting of workers (https://ec.europa.eu/social/main.jsp?catId=471
and intra-corporate transfer (https://ec.europa.eu/home-affairs/what-we-do/policies/legal-migration/work_en) provide more general information. These pages will be updated with further information, where necessary.
European Commission
Directorate
eneral for Internal market, Industry, Entrepreneurship and SME
Directorate
eneral for Trade                                                   16
OJ L 157, 27.5.2014, p. 1. This Directive does not apply to Ireland, nor to Denmark. 17
Cf. Recital 20 of Directive 96/71/EC. 18
Judgment of the Court of Justice of 9 August 1994, Vander Elst
C-43/93
ECLI:EU:C:1994:310, and judgment of the Court of Justice of 21 October 2004
Commission v Luxembourg
C-445/03, ECLI:EU:C:2004:655. See also judgment of the Court of Justice of 19 January 2006
Commission v Germany
C-244/04
ECLI:EU:C:2006:49

5 Directorate
eneral Employment, Social affairs and Inclusion
Directorate
eneral
igration and Home affairs
EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL ENERGY
Brussels, 25 September 2018 Replaces the notice published on 28 March 2018
OTICE TO STAKEHOLDER
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND THE EURATOM ACQUIS The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. This means that
unless a ratified withdrawal agreement
establishes another date, all Union primary and secondary law will cease to apply to the United Kingdom from 30 March 2019, 00:00h (CET) ('the withdrawal date').
The United Kingdom will then become a 'third country'.
Preparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for EU and national authorities but also for private parties
In view of the considerable uncertainties, in particular concerning the content of a possible withdrawal agreement and related repercussions, stakeholders engaged in the nuclear field are reminded of legal repercussion
which need to be considered when the United Kingdom becomes a third country

Subject to any transitional arrangement that may form part of a possible withdrawal agreement, as of the withdrawal date, the overall set of Euratom provisions (i.e. the Euratom acquis
no longer applies to the United Kingdom. This has
in particular
the following consequences

Negotiations are ongoing with the United Kingdom with a view to reaching a withdrawal agreement.
Furthermore, in accordance with Article 50(3) of the Treaty on European Union, the European Council, in agreement with the United Kingdom, may unanimously decide that the Treaties cease to apply at a later date.
A third country is a country not member of the EU.

For certain Euratom-related matters, the EU is trying to agree solutions with the United Kingdom in the withdrawal agreement. The essential principles of the EU/Euratom's position on nuclear materials and safeguard equipment (Euratom
are available here: https://ec.europa.eu/commission/publications/position-paper-nuclear-materials-and-safeguard-equipmen
euratom_en.
This notice does not address rules based on the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU)
6   Although not being Euratom acquis, it is recalled that nuclear materials, facilities, technologies and equipment fall within the scope of Council Regulation No 428/2009, of 5 May 2009, setting up a
1.
OMMON SUPPLY POLICY Chapter 6 of the Euratom Treaty provides that the supply of ores, source materials and special fissile materials be ensured by means of a common supply policy on the principle of equal access to sources of supply. To this end the Euratom Supply Agency (ESA) has the exclusive right to conclude contracts relating to the supply (imports, exports, and supply within the Community) of ores, source materials and special fissile materials. The statutes of ESA provide that this exclusive right is exercised by the co-signature of ESA to all contracts between parties for relevant material. In specific cases a separate authorisation may be required from the Commission before the ESA co-signs the contract.  As from the withdrawal date, the United Kingdom will cease to participate in the
ommon supply policy. Consequently, as from the withdrawal date, the co-signature by ESA of contracts pertaining to the supply of nuclear material
(and, where applicable, the Commission authorisation for such contracts) in connection with the United Kingdom
will cease to have effect.  As from the withdrawal date, ESA and, where relevant, the Commission, will have to take account of the fact that materials transferred to the United Kingdom will no longer contribute to the Community's security of supply and reach an assessment of the United Kingdom's safeguards regime before its co-signature and, where relevant, authorisation can be given in relation to the aforementioned contracts
This is without prejudice to the other elements of the contracts which are a matter for the parties to assess.  2.
XPORTS 2.1. Authorisation to dispose production outside the Community In accordance with Article 59 of the Euratom Treaty
the "conclusion" (co-signature by ESA) of contracts pertaining to the export of EU-produced nuclear materials towards a third country need
to be authorised by the Commission. Such authorisation may not be granted if the recipients of the supplies fail to satisfy the requirement that the general interests of the Community are safeguarded or in the event the terms and conditions of the contracts in question are contrary to the Euratom Treaty
Community regime for the control of exports, transfer, brokering and transit of dual-use items. For more details, see the "Notice to stakeholders
Withdrawal of the United Kingdom and EU rules in the field of import/export licences for certain goods
(https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness_en

The Commission authorisation will not be granted if the export of EU-produced nuclear materials towards a third country risks to jeopardise the security of supply, in the medium term, of such materials for EU users, or if the contracts concerned are likely to put at risk the EU nuclear non-proliferation objective.
As from the withdrawal date, this requirement will apply to exports from the EU-27 to the United Kingdom. 2.2. Consent of third parties and other special procedures Euratom has concluded several Nuclear Cooperation Agreements
with third countries. Currently, under these agreements nuclear items (including nuclear materials, equipment and other items usually foreseen in such agreements
can be transferred within the nuclear common market on the territory of the Euratom Community (including to and from UK) without being submitted to a special procedure
and/or the prior consent of the Third Country concerned.  As of the withdrawal date, the United Kingdom will be neither part of the common nuclear market, nor will it be covered by these agreements. As a consequence, exports and imports of nuclear items, to and from the United Kingdom
may require a special procedure and/or the prior consent of the Third Country concerned
3.
ASIC SAFETY STANDARDS DIRECTIVE10 Council Directive 2013/59
uratom11  the Euratom Basic Safety Standards Directive  applies, inter alia, to the import to and export from the Community of radioactive material (see Article 2(2) a of Council Directive 2013/59
uratom). As of the withdrawal date, any import of radioactive material from the United Kingdom to the Community and any export of

Agreement between the Government of Australia and the European Atomic Energy Community (Euratom) for cooperation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, OJ L 29, 1.2.2012, p. 4; Agreement between the Government of Japan and the European Atomic Energy Community for co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, OJ L 32, 6.2.2007, p. 65; Agreement for cooperation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy between the European Atomic Energy Community and the United States of America, OJ L 120, 20.5. 1996; Accord de coopération entre la Communauté européenne de l'énergie atomique (Euratom) et le gouvernement du Canada concernant les utilisations pacifiques de l'énergie atomique, OJ
60, 24.11.1959
Agreement between the European Atomic Energy Community and the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine for Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy, OJ L 261, 22.9.2006; Agreement for co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy between the European Atomic Energy Community and the Government of the Republic of Kazakhstan, OJ L 10, 15.1.2009; Agreement for cooperation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy between the European Atomic Energy Community (Euratom) and the Government of the Republic of Uzbekistan, OJ L 269, 21.10.2003, p. 9
9
This means for instance that the Supplier State would have to obtain formal governmental assurances from the Recipient State with regard to the peaceful uses of these items and in line with the provisions of the Nuclear Suppliers Group Guidelines for Nuclear Transfers (INFCIRC 254, as revised). 10
For goods (including goods falling within the scope of the Euratom acquis
placed on the EU market before the withdrawal date, the EU is trying to agree solutions with the United Kingdom in the withdrawal agreement. The essential principles of the EU's position on goods placed on the market under Union law before the withdrawal date are available here: https://ec.europa.eu/commission/publications/position-paper-goods-placed-market-under-union-law-withdrawal-date_en
Please note that the essential principles of the EU's position on goods build on one single definition of "placing on the market" ("first making available on the market"). 11   Council Directive 2013/59/Euratom laying down basic safety standards for protection against the dangers arising from exposure to ionising radiation, OJ L 13, 17.01.2014, p.1.
radioactive material from the Community to the United Kingdom will need to comply with the requirements in this Directive. In particular:   Article 20 of Council Directive 2013/59/Euratom defines specific requirements on undertakings intending to import a consumer product; Article 21 lists products for which import and export are prohibited. In addition, the import of consumer products from third countries is subject to regulatory control and requires notification and licensing (Articles 25 and 28).   Article 75 of Council Directive 2013/59/Euratom contains specific provisions on building materials which need to be complied with before such materials can be placed on the market in the Community.12  Article 93 of Council Directive 2013/59/Euratom obliges Member States to encourage the establishment of systems to detect the presence of radioactive contamination in metal products imported from third countries. 4.
UTHORISATION/INFORMATION OF SHIPMENTS13 As of the withdrawal date, Council Regulation (Euratom) No 1493/93 on shipments of radioactive substances between Member States14 will cease to apply to shipments between an EU-27 Member State and the United Kingdom. Council Directive 2006/117/Euratom on the supervision and control of shipments of radioactive waste15 and spent fuel lays down a Community system of supervision and control of transboundary shipments of radioactive waste and spent fuel. As of the withdrawal date the provisions of Chapter 2 of this Directive on intra-Community shipments will cease to apply to shipments between a Member State and the United Kingdom and Chapter 3 of the Directive on Extra Community Shipments will apply to shipments related to the United Kingdom.                                                  12
"Building materials" under Council Directive 2013/59 are "construction products
as defined in Regulation (EU) No 305/2011 on harmonised conditions for the marketing of construction products. Articles 13 and 2(21) of Regulation (EU) No 305/2011 lay down specific procedural obligations on importers that have to be fulfilled when placing a construction product from a third country on the Union market. Consequently, when placing on the market building materials imported from the UK, the importers will have to demonstrate the compliance with Article 75 of Directive 2013/59 by following the imports-specific procedure defined in Article 13 of Regulation (EU) No 305/2011, (cf. recitals 17  21 of Directive 2013/59). 13
For a movement of goods that has started before and ends on or after the withdrawal date, ("sailing goods"), the EU is trying to agree solutions with the United Kingdom in the withdrawal agreement. The essential principles of the EU's position on Customs related matters needed for an orderly withdrawal of the UK from the Union are available here: https://ec.europa.eu/commission/publications/position-paper-customs-related-matters-needed-orderly-withdrawal-uk-union_en
14
Council Regulation (Euratom) No 1493/93 of 8 June 1993 on shipments of radioactive substances between Member States OJ L 148, 19.6.1993, p. 1
15
Council Directive 2006/117/Euratom of 20 November 2006 on the supervision and control of shipments of radioactive waste and spent fuel, L 337, 5.12.2006 , p. 21
5 Council Directive 2011/70/Euratom establishing a Community framework for the responsible and safe management of spent fuel and radioactive waste16 sets rules for shipment
of radioactive waste from a Member State to a third country with the aim of disposal. As of the withdrawal date, these rules apply for shipments from the EU-27 to the United Kingdom. According to Article 4(4), second subparagraph of Council Directive 2011/70/Euratom
hese rules include:
n obligation to inform the Commission prior to shipment to a third country
the obligation that the Member States in question need
to have in place an agreement with the third country to use a disposal facility
the requirement that the disposal facility needs to be authorised and operating
5.
THER ISSUES  As of the withdrawal date, the freedoms guaranteed under the Euratom Treaty, including the free movement of goods and products17, of skilled staff, or of natural or legal persons wishing to participate in the construction of nuclear installations, will cease to apply in the relations between the United Kingdom and the EU-27
The website of the Commission on nuclear energy (https://ec.europa.eu/energy/en/topics/nuclear-energy) provide
more general information. These pages will be updated with further information, where necessary.
European Commission Directorate-General Energy                                                  16
Council Directive 2011/70/Euratom of 19 July 2011 establishing a Community framework for the responsible and safe management of spent fuel and radioactive waste, OJ L 199, 2. 8. 2011, p. 48. 17
As specified by Annex IV to the Euratom Treaty

EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL ENERGY
Brussels, 27 April 2018 Rev
NOTICE TO STAKEHOLDER
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND THE INTERNAL ENERGY MARKET
The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. This means that, unless a ratified withdrawal agreement
establishes another date, all Union primary and secondary law will cease to apply to the United Kingdom from 30 March 2019, 00:00h (CET) ('the withdrawal date').
The United Kingdom will then become a 'third country'.
Preparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for EU and national authorities, but also for private parties.
In view of the considerable uncertainties, in particular concerning the content of a possible withdrawal agreement, stakeholders are reminded of legal repercussions which need to be considered when the United Kingdom becomes a third country.
Subject to any transitional arrangement that may be contained in a possible withdrawal agreement, as of the withdrawal date, the EU rules in the field of energy market regulation
will no longer apply to the United Kingdom. This has in particular the following consequences:
Negotiations are ongoing with the United Kingdom with a view to reaching a withdrawal agreement.
Furthermore, in accordance with Article 50(3) of the Treaty on European Union, the European Council, in agreement with the United Kingdom, may unanimously decide that the Treaties cease to apply at a later date.
A third country is a country not member of the EU.
Directive 2009/72/EC of the European Parliament and the Council of 13 July 2009 concerning common rules for the internal market in electricity, OJ L 211, 14.8.2009, p. 55; Directive 2009/73/EC of the European Parliament and the Council concerning common rules for the internal market in natural gas, OJ L 211, 14.8.2009, p. 94; Regulation (EC) No 713/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 July 2009 establishing an Agency for the Cooperation of Energy Regulators, OJ L 211, 14.8.2009, p. 1; Regulation (EC) No 714/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 July 2009 on conditions for access to the network for cross-border exchanges of electricity, OJ L 211, 14.8.2009, p. 15; Regulation (EC) No 715/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 July 2009 on conditions for access to the natural gas transmission networks, OJ L 211, 14.8.2009, p. 36, Regulation (EU) No 1227/2011 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 October 2011 on wholesale energy market integrity and transparency
OJ L 326, 8.12.2011, p. 1.
2 1.
OMPENSATION BETWEEN TRANSMISSION SYSTEM OPERATORS (TSO
Regulation (EC) No 714/2009
sets out the principles for an inter-transmission system operator compensation mechanism and for charges for access to networks.  On the basis of these principles, Commission Regulation (EU) No 838/2010
provide
that EU TSOs receive compensation for hosting cross-border flows of electricity on their networks. This compensation replaces explicit charges for the use of interconnectors.  Regarding third country imports and exports of electricity, Commission Regulation (EU) No 838/2010
provides that a transmission system use fee is to be paid on all scheduled imports and exports of electricity from all third countries which have not adopted an agreement whereby it is applying Union law. As of the withdrawal date this provision will apply to imports of electricity from and exports of electricity to the United Kingdom
2.
NTERCONNECTIVITY EU gas and electricity market legislation sets out rules on the allocation of interconnection capacity and provides for mechanisms to facilitate their implementation. In particular:  Commission Regulation (EU) 2016/1719
establishes
single platform to allocate TSOs' forward interconnection capacities. It provides a central point of contact to market participant for the booking of long-term transmission capacities across the EU.  Commission Regulation (EU) 2017/2195
establishes the European balancing platforms for the exchange of standard balancing products. As single points of contact they allow EU TSOs to resource balancing energy at short notice from across the borders
Commission Regulation (EU) 2015/122210 establishes the single day-ahead and intraday coupling of the EU's electricity markets. It assists market participants in
Regulation (EC) No 714/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 July 2009 on conditions for access to the network for cross-border exchanges of electricity, OJ L 211, 14.8.2009, p. 15; see notably Articles 13 and 14.
Commission Regulation (EU) No 838/2010 of 23 September 2010 on laying down guidelines relating to the inter-transmission system operator compensation mechanism and a common regulatory approach to transmission charging, OJ L 250, 24.9.2010, p. 5; see notably Annex A, points 2 and 3.
Annex A, point 7, of Commission Regulation (EU) No 838/2010.
See Articles 48 to 50 of Commission Regulation (EU) 2016/1719 of 26 September 2016 establishing a guideline on forward capacity allocation, OJ L 259, 27.9.2016, p. 42.
See Articles 19 to 21 of Commission Regulation (EU) 2017/2195 of 23 November 2017 establishing a guideline on electricity balancing, OJ L 312, 28.11.2017, p. 6. 10
See Chapters 5 and 6 of Commission Regulation (EU) 2015/1222 of 24 July 2015 establishing a guideline on capacity allocation and congestion management, OJ L 197, 25.7.2015, p. 24.
3 organising bulk power transactions across EU borders close to delivery time. The single day-ahead and intraday market couplings are the central tool
to integrate the EU's internal electricity market. Regulation (EU) 2015/1222 also provides for common requirements for the designation of nominated electricity market operators (NEMOs) in market coupling. Their tasks include receiving orders from market participants, having overall responsibility for matching and allocating orders in accordance with the single day-ahead and intraday coupling results, publishing prices and settling and clearing the contracts resulting from the trades according to relevant participant agreements and regulations. NEMOs are entitled to offer their services in Member States other than those in which they are designated. As of the withdrawal date
United Kingdom based operators will cease to participate in the single allocation platform for forward interconnection capacity, the European balancing platforms and the single day-ahead and intraday coupling. United Kingdom based NEMOs will become third country operators and will no longer be entitled to carry out market coupling services in the EU.
3
ELECTRICITY AND GAS TRADING Regulation (EU) 1227/201111 prohibits market abuses on EU wholesale power and gas markets. In order to effectively prosecute market abuses
Article 9(1) of Regulation (EU) 1227/2011 requires EU based market participants to register with their national energy regulatory authority. Market participants from third countries are required to register with the national energy regulatory authority of a Member State where they are active. As of the withdrawal date
market participants based in the United Kingdom will become third country participants. As a consequence, according to Article 9(1) of Regulation (EU) 1227/2011, participants based in the United Kingdom who wish to continue trading EU wholesale energy products as of the withdrawal date will need to register with the national energy regulatory authority of a Member State where they are active. According to Article 9(4) of Regulation (EU) 1227/2011, the registration form has to be submitted prior to entering into a transaction which is required to be reported.  The national regulatory authority registering market participants from the United Kingdom is responsible for ensuring that the enforcement provisions pursuant to Article 13 to 18 of Regulation (EU) 1227/2011 can be effectively applied.
4.
NVESTMENTS IN TRANSMISSION SYSTEM OPERATORS Directive (EU) 2009/72/EC12 and Directive (EU) 2009/73/EC13 provide for the certification of TSOs. According to Article 11 of Directive (EU) 2009/72/EC and                                                             11
Regulation (EU) No 1227/2011 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 October 2011 on wholesale energy market integrity and transparency, OJ L 326, 8.12.2011, p. 1 (REMIT). 12
Directive 2009/72/EC of the European Parliament and the Council of 13 July 2009 concerning common rules for the internal market in electricity, OJ L 211, 14.8.2009, p. 55.
4 Directive (EU) 2009/73/EC, the certification of a TSO which is controlled by a person or persons from a third country is subject to specific rules. In particular, the Directive
require Member State
and the Commission to assess whether granting certification to the concerned transmission system operator controlled by (a) third country person(s) will put at risk the security of energy supply of the Member State and the EU.  TSOs controlled on the withdrawal date by investors from the United Kingdom are TSOs controlled by persons from a third country. For these TSOs to continue their activity in the EU, they require a certification in accordance with Article 11 of Directive (EU) 2009/72/EC and Directive (EU) 2009/73/EC. Member States may refuse certification where granting certification poses a threat to security of supply of the Member State.
5
CONDITIONS FOR GRANTING AND USING AUTHORISATIONS FOR THE PROSPECTION
EXPLORATION AND PRODUCTION OF HYDROCARBONS Directive (EU) 94/22/EC14 sets out the rules for authorising the prospection, exploration and production of hydrocarbons. It ensures inter alia that procedures are open to all entities and authorisations should be granted on the basis of objective and published criteria. According to the second sub-paragraph of Article 2(2) of Directive (EU) 94/22/EC, Member States may refuse on grounds of national security to allow access to and exercise of these activities to any entity which is effectively controlled by third countries or third country nationals.  As of the withdrawal date, the second sub-paragraph of Article 2(2) of Directive (EU) 94/22/EC applies where authorisations have been granted or are requested to be granted to an entity which is effectively controlled by the United Kingdom or United Kingdom nationals.
The website of the Commission on energy policy (https://ec.europa.eu/energy/en/home) provides general information. These pages will be updated with further information, where necessary.

European Commission Directorate-General Energy                                                                                                                                                                                  13
Directive 2009/73/EC of the European Parliament and the Council concerning common rules for the internal market in natural gas, OJ L 211, 14.8.2009, p. 94
14
Directive 94/22/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 30 May 1994 on the conditions for granting and using authorizations for the prospection, exploration and production of hydrocarbons OJ L 164, 30.6.1994, p. 3

EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL ENERGY
Brussels, 7 March 2018
OTICE TO STAKEHOLDER
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND EU RULES IN THE FIELD OF GUARANTEES OF ORIGIN OF ELECTRICITY FROM RENEWABLE ENERGY SOURCES The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. This means that, unless a ratified withdrawal agreement
establishes another date, all Union primary and secondary law will cease to apply to the United Kingdom from 30 March 2019, 00:00h (CET) ('the withdrawal date').
The United Kingdom will then become a 'third country'.
Preparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for EU and national authorities but also for private parties.  In view of the considerable uncertainties, in particular concerning the content of a possible withdrawal agreement, all stakeholders concerned
are reminded of certain legal repercussions stemming from currently applicable rules of Union law which need to be considered when the United Kingdom becomes a third country. Subject to any transitional arrangement that may be contained in a possible withdrawal agreement, as of the withdrawal date, Directive 2009/28/EC on the promotion of the use of energy from renewable sources
and Directive 2012/27/EU on energy efficiency
will no longer apply to the United Kingdom. This has in particular the following consequences in the areas of Guarantees of Origin and Certification of Installers.
Negotiations are ongoing with the United Kingdom with a view to reaching a withdrawal agreement.
Furthermore, in accordance with Article 50(3) of the Treaty on European Union, the European Council, in agreement with the United Kingdom, may unanimously decide that the Treaties cease to apply at a later date.
A third country is a country not member of the EU.
Renewable energy producers, producers of electricity from high efficiency Combined Heat and Power (CHP), issuing bodies and suppliers using Guarantees of Origin
certified installers of small-scale biomass boilers and stoves, solar photovoltaic and solar thermal systems, shallow geothermal systems and pumps.
Directive 2009/28/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 April 2009 on the promotion of the use of energy from renewable sources, OJ L 140, 5.6.2009, p. 16.
Directive 2012/27/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 October 2012  on energy efficiency, OJ L 315, 14.11.2012, p.1.
2 1.
UARANTEES OF ORIGIN In accordance with Article 15(2) of Directive 2009/28/EC
Member States must ensure that a guarantee of origin is issued in response to a request from a producer of electricity from renewable energy sources. The guarantees of origin are issued for the purpose
of proving to the final customers the share or quantity of energy from renewable energy sources in an energy supplier's energy mix pursuant to Article 3(9) of Directive 2009/72/EC
In accordance with
rticle 15(9) of Directive 2009/28/EC
Member States must recognise guarantees of origin issued by other Member States
Guarantees of origin that have been issued by designated bodies in the United Kingdom in accordance with Article 15(2) of Directive 2009/28/EC will no longer be recognised by the EU-27 Member States
s of the withdrawal date
In accordance with Article 14(10) of Directive 2012/27/EU
Member States must ensure that the origin of electricity produced from high-efficiency cogeneration can be guaranteed according to objective, transparent and non-discriminatory criteria and to this end issue electronically guarantees of origin of a standard size of 1MWh which contain at least the information specified in Annex X. Member States shall mutually recognise their guarantees of origin.
Guarantees of origin that have been issued by designated bodies in the United Kingdom in accordance with Article 14(10) of Directive 2012/27/EU will no longer be recognised by the EU-27 Member States
s of the withdrawal date.  2.
ERTIFICATION OF INSTALLERS In accordance with Article 14(3) of Directive 2009/28/EC, Member States shall ensure that certification schemes or equivalent qualification schemes are available for installers of small-scale biomass boilers and stoves, solar photovoltaic and solar thermal systems, shallow geothermal systems and heat pumps, which shall be based on criteria established in Annex IV of said Directive. Member States shall recognise certification awarded by other Member States in accordance with those criteria.
ertification
of installers awarded by the United Kingdom in accordance with Article 14(3) of Directive 2009/28/EC will no longer be recognised by the EU-27 Member States
s of the withdrawal date
The website of the Commission on energy policy (https://ec.europa.eu/energy/en/home) provides general information. These pages will be updated with further information, where necessary.   European Commission Directorate-General Energy
Directive 2009/72/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 July 2009 concerning common rules for the internal market in electricity, OJ L 211, 14.8.2009, p. 55.
Subject to the exception set out in Article 15(
of Directive 2009/28/EC, whereby a Member State may refuse to recognise a guarantee of origin only if it has well founded doubts about its accuracy, reliability or veracity.
Subject to the exception set out in Article 14(10) of Directive 2012/27/EU.
EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL FOR THE ENVIRONMENT
Brussels, 08/02/2018
OTICE TO STAKEHOLDER
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND EU RULES FOR THE USE OF THE  EU
COLABEL The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. This means that, unless a ratified withdrawal agreement
establishes another date, all Union primary and secondary law will cease to apply to the United Kingdom from 30 March 2019, 00:00h (CET) ('the withdrawal date').
The United Kingdom will then become a 'third country'.
Preparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for EU and national authorities but also for private parties.  In view of the considerable uncertainties, in particular concerning the content of a possible withdrawal agreement, all interested parties, and especially economic operators, are reminded of legal repercussions, which need to considered when the United Kingdom becomes a third country.
Subject to any transitional arrangement that may be contained in a possible withdrawal agreement, as of the withdrawal date, Regulation (EC) No 66/2010 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 November 2009 on the EU Ecolabel
("the EU Ecolabel Regulation") no longer applies to the United Kingdom. This has in particular the following consequences for goods placed on the EU-27 market as from the withdrawal date
As from the withdrawal date the EU Ecolabel Competent Body designated by the United Kingdom according to Article 4 of the EU Ecolabel Regulation will lose its
Negotiations are ongoing with the United Kingdom with a view to reaching a withdrawal agreement.
Furthermore, in accordance with Article 50(3) of the Treaty on European Union, the European Council, in agreement with the United Kingdom, may unanimously decide that the Treaties cease to apply at a later date.
A third country is a country not member of the EU.
OJ L27, 30.1.2010, p. 1
5
For goods placed on the EU market before the withdrawal date, the EU is trying to agree solutions with the United Kingdom in the withdrawal agreement. The essential principles of the EU's position on goods placed on the market under Union law before the withdrawal date are available here: https://ec.europa.eu/commission/publications/position-paper-goods-placed-market-under-union-law-withdrawal-date_en
2 status. It will not be in the position to carry out the tasks described in the EU Ecolabel Regulation. It will therefore be removed from the list of EU Ecolabel Competent Bodies on the EU Ecolabel website and its right to access the Ecolabel catalogue (ECAT) database will be removed.   EU Ecolabels awarded by the EU Ecolabel Competent Body designated by the United Kingdom can no longer be used on products placed on the EU-27 market as of the withdrawal date, and on associated promotional material.
Where economic operators hold an EU Ecolabel contract issued by the UK Ecolabel Competent Body prior to the withdrawal date and plan to continue using the EU Ecolabel when placing the product concerned on the EU-27 market as from the withdrawal date, they are advised to consider one of the two following options:
pplying for a new contract with an EU-27 Ecolabel Competent Body or
rranging for a transfer  on the basis of a contractual arrangement between the holder of the EU Ecolabel, the UK Ecolabel Competent Body, and the EU-27 Ecolabel Competent Body
of the file and the corresponding contract from the UK Ecolabel Competent Body to an EU-27 Ecolabel Competent Body. The website of the Commission on the EU Ecolabel provides for general information concerning the EU Ecolabel application process and EU Ecolabel Competent Bodies These pages will be updated with further information, where necessary.
European Commission
irectorate
eneral for the Environment

Article 9(11) of the EU Ecolabel Regulation.
EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL ENVIRONMENT
Brussels, 8 November 2018
REV1
replaces the notice to stakeholders published on 8 February 2018)
OTICE TO STAKEHOLDER
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND EU WASTE LAW The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. This means that
unless a ratified withdrawal agreement
establishes another date, all Union primary and secondary law will cease to apply to the United Kingdom from 30 March 2019, 00:00h (CET) ('the withdrawal date').
The United Kingdom will then become a 'third country'.
Preparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for EU and national authorities but also for private parties. In view of the considerable uncertainties, in particular concerning the content of a possible withdrawal agreement, relevant stakeholders are reminded of legal repercussions, which need to be considered when the United Kingdom becomes a third country
Subject to any transitional arrangement that may be contained in a possible withdrawal agreement, as of the withdrawal date, EU waste law no longer applies to the United Kingdom. This has in particular the following consequences with regard to shipments of waste

Negotiations are ongoing with the United Kingdom with a view to reaching a withdrawal agreement.
Furthermore, in accordance with Article 50(3) of the Treaty on European Union, the European Council, in agreement with the United Kingdom, may unanimously decide that the Treaties cease to apply at a later date.
A third country is a country not member of the EU.
1.
RANSBOUNDARY SHIPMENTS OF WASTE
1.1. Prohibitions of waste shipments Articles 34 and 3(5) of Regulation (EC) No 1013/2006 on shipments of waste
prohibit the export of   waste for disposal; and   mixed municipal waste
for recovery operations  from the EU to a third country, unless it is a member of the European Free Trade Association (EFTA) and a party to the Basel Convention. Consequently, as of the withdrawal date all exports of waste for disposal and the export of mixed municipal waste for recovery from the EU-27 to the United Kingdom will be prohibited. Imports of waste into the EU-27 will be governed, as of the withdrawal date, by Title V of Regulation (EC) No 1013/2006, whereby imports of waste from a third country party to the Basel Convention remains allowed, subject to the requirements set out in that Regulation.
1.2.
onsents issued prior to the withdrawal date Article 9 of Regulation (EC) No 1013/2006 requires the "consent" by the competent authorities of destination, dispatch and transit of notified waste shipments. For consents issued by competent authorities of Member States of the EU-27
ior to the withdrawal date for shipments as of the withdrawal date, the following applies:  Where the shipment is prohibited under Regulation (EC) No 1013/2006, the consent becomes void.
In the context of the negotiations of the EU-UK withdrawal agreement, the EU is trying to agree solutions with the United Kingdom for movement
of goods that have started before and end after the end of the transition period ("sailing goods"). See, in particular, the latest text of the draft withdrawal agreement agreed at negotiator's level, which is available here: https://ec.europa.eu/commission/sites/beta-political/files/draft_agreement_coloured.pdf and the "joint statement" from the negotiators of the EU and of the United Kingdom Government presented on 19 June 2018 (https://ec.europa.eu/commission/brexit-negotiations/negotiating-documents-article-50-negotiations-united-kingdom_en).
5
OJ L 190, 12.7.2006, p. 1
6
Mixed municipal waste (waste entry 20 03 01 in accordance with the Commission Decision 2000/532/EC on the list of waste, OJ L 226, 6.9.2000, p. 3) collected from private households, including where such collection also covers such waste from other producers.
Regarding notifications of imports, see also the "Notice to stakeholders
Withdrawal of the United Kingdom and EU rules in the field of import/export licences for certain goods" (https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness_en).
Where shipments are not per se prohibited, the change of the status of the United Kingdom from a Member State to a third country is an essential change under Article 17 of Regulation (EC) No 1013/2006. In accordance with Article 17(2) of Regulation (EC) No 1013/2006, in case of such an essential change, a new notification shall be submitted, unless all the competent authorities concerned consider that the proposed changes do not require a new notification.  Even if all competent authorities concerned consider that a new notification is not required, it is recalled that the requirements for waste shipments between the EU and the United Kingdom
which, after its withdrawal from the EU, remains a Party to the Basel Convention of 22 March 1989 on the control of transboundary movements of hazardous waste and their disposal, as well as a
"OECD-Decision country"
- will be subject to the conditions set out in Articles 38(3)(a),(b),(c) and (e) and 42(3)(b),(c) and (d) of Regulation (EC) No 1013/2006 which may require inter alia

he competent authorities concerned to send a stamped copy of their decisions to consent to the relevant customs offices (e.g. customs offices of exit or entry)

he carrier to deliver a copy of the movement document to the relevant Union customs offices (e.g. customs offices of exit or entry)

he relevant Union customs offices to send where applicable a stamped copy of the movement document to the competent authority of dispatc
transit and destination in the Union stating that the waste has either left or entered the Union

n case of an export from the Union, for the contract associated with the notification to stipulate certain obligations for the consignee of the waste and for the treatment facility. In addition, the notification will have to contain information of the customs office
of entry and exit
2. EU WASTE MANAGEMENT TARGETS AND RECOVERY OPERATIONS IN THIRD COUNTRIES
Where recovery of waste generated in the EU Member States takes place outside the EU, Member States can count that waste towards the fulfilment of their EU waste management targets depending on the treatment conditions outside the EU. In particular
I.e. a country to which Decision C(2001)107/FINAL of the OECD Council applies, see Article 2(17) of Regulation (EC) No 1013/2006.
"Block 16" of the notification document. See Annex 1A and point 44 of annex 1C of Regulation (EC) No 1013/2006.
Exports of waste electrical and electronic equipment for treatment in the United Kingdom will be counted towards the waste management targets of Directive 2012/19/EC on waste electrical and electronic equipment10 if there is sound evidence that the treatment of that waste in the United Kingdom takes place in conditions that are equivalent to the requirements of that Directive.11
Exports of waste batteries and accumulators for treatment in the United Kingdom will be counted towards the waste management targets of Directive 2006/66/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 6 September 2006 on batteries and accumulators and waste batteries and accumulators12 if there is sound evidence that the treatment of that waste in the United Kingdom takes place in conditions that are equivalent to the requirements of that Directive.13
Exports of municipal waste for preparation for reuse and recycling, and exports of construction and demolition waste for preparation for reuse, recycling and other material recovery in the United Kingdom will be counted towards the waste management targets of Directive 2008/98/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 19 November 2008 on waste14 if there is sound evidence showing compliance of the shipment with the provisions of Regulation (EC) No 1013/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council15, and in particular Article 49(2) thereof.16  Exports of packaging and packaging waste can be counted towards the waste management targets of the European Parliament and Council Directive 94/62/EC of 20 December 1994 on packaging and packaging waste17 if there is sound evidence that the recovery and/or recycling in the United Kingdom takes place under conditions that are broadly equivalent to those prescribed by the Union legislation on the matter,18 including the provisions of Regulation (EC) No 1013/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council,19 and in particular Article 49(2) thereof
10
OJ L 197, 24.7.2012, p. 38. 11
Article 10(2) of Directive 2012/19/EC. 12
OJ L 266, 26.9.2006, p. 1. 13
Article 15(2) of Directive 2006/66/EC. 14
OJ L 312, 22.11.2008, p. 3. 15
OJ L 190 12.7.2006, p. 1. 16
Article 2(5) of Commission Decision 2011/753/EU of 18 November 2011 establishing rules and calculation methods for verifying compliance with the targets set in Article 11(2) of Directive 2008/98/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council, OJ L 310, 25.11.2011, p. 11
17
OJ L 365, 31.12.1994, p. 10. 18
Article 4(1) of Commission Decision 2005/270/EC establishing the formats relating to the database system pursuant to Directive 94/62/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council on packaging and packaging waste, OJ L 86, 5.4.2005, p. 6. 19
OJ L 190 12.7.2006, p. 1
5  Exports of end-of life vehicles can be counted towards the waste management targets of Directive 2000/53/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 September 2000 on end-of life vehicles20 if there is sound evidence that the recovery and/or recycling in the United Kingdom takes place under conditions that are broadly equivalent to those prescribed by the Union legislation on the matter,21 including Regulation (EC) No 1013/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council,22 and in particular Article 49(2) thereof.  The website of the Commission on waste policy (http://ec.europa.eu/environment/waste/index.htm) provide
general information concerning shipments of waste and the recycling of specific waste streams. These pages will be updated with further information, where necessary.
European Commission
Directorate-General Environment                                                  20
OJ L 269, 21.10.2000, p. 34. 21
Article 2(1) of Commission Decision 2005/293/EC of 1 April 2005 laying down detailed rules on the monitoring of the reuse/recovery and reuse/recycling targets set out in Directive 2000/53/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council on end-of-life vehicles, OJ L 94, 13.4.2005, p. 30
22
OJ L 190 12.7.2006, p. 1.
EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL FOR THE ENVIRONMENT
Brussels, 7 March 2018
OTICE TO STAKEHOLDER
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND EU RULES ON TRADE IN PROTECTED SPECIES OF WILD FAUNA AND FLORA The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. This means that
unless a ratified withdrawal agreement
establishes another date, all Union primary and secondary law will cease to apply to the United Kingdom from 30 March 2019, 00:00h (CET) ('the withdrawal date').
The United Kingdom will then become a 'third country'.
Preparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for EU and national authorities but also for private parties
In view of the considerable uncertainties, in particular concerning the content of a possible withdrawal agreement, relevant stakeholders are reminded of legal repercussions, which need to be considered when the United Kingdom becomes a third country
Subject to any transitional arrangement that may be contained in a possible withdrawal agreement, as of the withdrawal date, Council Regulation (EC) No 338/97 of 9 December 1996 on the protection of species of wild fauna and flora by regulating trade therein
no longer applies to the United Kingdom.
Negotiations are ongoing with the United Kingdom with a view to reaching a withdrawal agreement.
Furthermore, in accordance with Article 50(3) of the Treaty on European Union, the European Council, in agreement with the United Kingdom, may unanimously decide that the Treaties cease to apply at a later date.
A third country is a country not member of the EU.
For a movement of goods that has started before and ends on or after the withdrawal date, the EU undertakes to agree solutions with the United Kingdom in the withdrawal agreement on the basis of the EU's position on Customs related matters needed for an orderly withdrawal of the United Kingdom from the Union (https://ec.europa.eu/commission/publications/position-paper-customs-related-matters-needed-orderly-withdrawal-uk-union_en ).
OJ L 61, 3.3.1997, p. 1.
This has in particular the following consequences:
According to Article 4 of Council Regulation 338/97, the introduction into the EU of specimens of species included in Annexes A and B to that Regulation (hereafter "protected species") is subject to the prior presentation, at the customs office of entry, of an import permit issued by a management authority of the Member State of destination. Article 4 of Council Regulation 338/97 also lays down the conditions determining the issuance of this import permit
According to Article 5 of Council Regulation 338/97, the export or re-export from the EU to a third country of specimens of protected species are subject to the prior presentation, at the customs office at which the export formalities are completed, of an export permit or re-export certificate issued by a management authority of the EU Member State in which the specimens are located. Article 5 of Council Regulation 338/97 also lays down the conditions determining the issuance of these export permits or certificates
As of the withdrawal date, Articles 4 and 5 of Council Regulation 338/97 apply to the introduction and (re-) export of specimens of protected species between the United Kingdom and the EU-27. For the cross-border movement of protected species for non-commercial purposes specific derogations to these rules are in place, especially for personal and household effects and scientific institutions, pursuant to Article 7(3) and 7(4) of Council Regulation 338/97.
The website of the Commission on the EU wildlife trade regulatory framework (http://ec.europa.eu/environment/cites/legislation_en.htm) provide
general information concerning these issues. These pages will be updated with further information, where necessary.
European Commission Directorate-General for the Environment

Regarding notifications of imports, see also the "Notice to stakeholders
Withdrawal of the United Kingdom and EU rules in the field of import/export licences for certain goods" (https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness_en).
EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL FOR ENVIRONMENT                                                   DIRECTORATE-GENERAL FOR INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION AND DEVELOPMENT
Brussels, 21 March 2018
OTICE TO STAKEHOLDER
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND EU RULES IN THE FIELD O
FIGHT AGAINST
LLEGAL LOGGING AND ASSOCIATED TRADE The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. This means that
unless a ratified withdrawal agreement
establishes another date, all Union primary and secondary law will cease to apply to the United Kingdom from 30 March 2019, 00:00h (CET) ('the withdrawal date').
The United Kingdom will then become a 'third country'.
Preparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for EU and national authorities but also for private parties
In view of the considerable uncertainties, in particular concerning the content of a possible withdrawal agreement, timber importers to the EU who are acting as operators within the meaning of the Article 2 of Regulation (EU) No 995/2010
are reminded of legal repercussions, which need to be considered when the United Kingdom becomes a third country
Subject to any transitional arrangement that may be contained in a possible withdrawal agreement, as of the withdrawal date, the EU rules in the field of timber trade, in particular Regulation (EU) No 995/2010, Council Regulation (EC) No 2173/2005 establishing a Forest Law Enforcement, Governance and Trade
FLEGT
licencing
Negotiations are ongoing with the United Kingdom with a view to reaching a withdrawal agreement.
Furthermore, in accordance with Article 50(3) of the Treaty on European Union, the European Council, in agreement with the United Kingdom, may unanimously decide that the Treaties cease to apply at a later date.
A third country is a country not member of the EU.
Regulation (EU) No 995/2010 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 20 October 2010 laying down the obligations of operators who place timber and timber products on the market
OJ L 295, 12.11.2010, p. 23
5
For a movement of goods that has started before and ends on or after the withdrawal date, the EU undertakes to agree solutions with the United Kingdom in the withdrawal agreement on the basis of the EU's position on Customs related matters needed for an orderly withdrawal of the United Kingdom from the Union (https://ec.europa.eu/commission/publications/position-paper-customs-related-matters-needed-orderly-withdrawal-uk-union_en ).
2 scheme
and any related FLEGT Voluntary Partnership Agreements that the EU has concluded with third countries
no longer apply to the United Kingdom. This has in particular the following consequences:
According to Article 4 of the Regulation (EU) No 995/2010, operators have a due diligence obligation when placing timber or timber products on the market. As of the withdrawal date, this obligation applies to EU-27 operators who import timber and timber products from the United Kingdom  no matter where the timber was initially logged.  According to Article 8(2)(a) of Regulation (EU) No 995/2010, monitoring organisations have to be established within the Union. As of the withdrawal date, the recognition as monitoring organisations of organisations established in the United Kingdom is no longer valid. They will not be in a position to carry out the tasks set out in Regulation (EU) No 995/2010.  Council Regulation (EC) No 2173/2005 set
up the FLEGT licencing scheme. It allows for the control of the entry of timber to the EU from countries entering into bilateral FLEGT Voluntary Partnership Agreements (VPA) with the EU. Once agreed, the VPAs include commitments and action from both parties to halt trade in illegal timber, notably with a license scheme at the partner country and the issuance of FLEGT licences that certify the legality of timber exported to the EU. As of the withdrawal date, this scheme, including the FLEGT VPAs no longer applies to the United Kingdom
The website of the Commission on action against illegal logging (http://ec.europa.eu/environment/forests/flegt.htm) provide
for general information. These pages will be updated with further information, where necessary.
European Commission
irectorate
eneral for Environment                                                                           Directorate-General for International Cooperation and Developmen

Council Regulation (EC) No 2173/2005 of 20 December 2005 on the establishment of a FLEGT licensing scheme for imports of timber into the European Community
OJ L 347, 30.12.2005, p. 1
7
The EU has so far concluded Voluntary Partnership Agreements with Ghana, Republic of Congo, Cameroon, Indonesia, the Central African Republic and Liberia.
Regarding notifications of imports, see also the "Notice to stakeholders
Withdrawal of the United Kingdom and EU rules in the field of import/export licences for certain goods" (https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness_en).
EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL FOR THE ENVIRONMENT
Brussels, 7 March 2018
OTICE TO STAKEHOLDER
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND EU RULES IN THE FIELD OF THE
COMMUNITY ECO-MANAGEMENT AND AUDIT SCHEME (EMAS) The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. This means that, unless a ratified withdrawal agreement
establishes another date, all Union primary and secondary law will cease to apply to the United Kingdom from 30 March 2019, 00:00h (CET) ('the withdrawal date').
The United Kingdom will then become a 'third country'.
Preparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for EU and national authorities but also for private parties.  In view of the considerable uncertainties, in particular concerning the content of a possible withdrawal agreement, all interested parties, and especially Eco-Management and Audit Scheme (EMAS
registered organisations, organisations planning to apply for EMAS registration, Competent Bodies, Accreditation Bodies and environmental verifiers, are reminded of legal repercussions, which need to considered when the United Kingdom becomes a third country. Subject to any transitional arrangement that may be contained in a possible withdrawal agreement, as of the withdrawal date, Regulation (EC) No 1221/2009 on the voluntary participation by organisations in a Community eco-management and audit scheme ("the EMAS Regulation")
will no longer apply to the United Kingdom. This has in particular the following consequences
1. EMAS REGISTRATIONS  As from the withdrawal date, the EMAS Competent Bod
designated by the United Kingdom according to Article 11 of the EMAS Regulation will lose its status. It will not be in the position to carry out the tasks described in the EMAS Regulation. It will therefore be removed from the list of EMAS Competent Bodies on the EU EMAS website and its right to access the EMAS register database will be removed.
Negotiations are ongoing with the United Kingdom with a view to reaching a withdrawal agreement.
Furthermore, in accordance with Article 50(3) of the Treaty on European Union, the European Council, in agreement with the United Kingdom, may unanimously decide that the Treaties cease to apply at a later date.
A third country is a country not member of the EU.
OJ L 342, 22.12.2009, p. 1.
EMAS registrations awarded by the EMAS Competent Body designated by the United Kingdom are no longer valid and the EMAS logo can no longer be used by organisations as of the withdrawal date.
Article 3(3) of the EMAS Regulation establishes the possibility of the registration of organisations from outside the European Union (EMAS global registration):
Organisations based in the United Kingdom can, as from the withdrawal date, apply for a new EMAS-global registration with
n EU-27 EMAS Competent Body or  on the basis of a contractual arrangement between the EMAS registered organisation, the United Kingdom EMAS Competent Body, and one of the EU-27 EMAS Competent Bodies
arrange for a transfer of the registration from the UK EMAS Competent Body to an EU-27 EMAS Competent Body. Furthermore, Article 3(2) of the EMAS Regulation establishes the possibility for organisations established in the EU-27 to include sites located in third countries into one single corporate registration
2. EMAS ENVIRONMENTAL VERIFIERS  As from the withdrawal date
the EMAS Accreditation Body appointed by the United Kingdom according to Article 28 of the EMAS Regulation will lose its status. It will not be in the position to carry out the tasks described in the EMAS Regulation. It will therefore be removed from the list of EMAS Accreditation and Licensing Bodies on the EU EMAS website.  As from the withdrawal date
EMAS environmental verifiers accredited by the  Articles 20 and 21 of the EMAS Regulation will lose their status and will not be in the position to carry out the tasks described in the EMAS Regulation. The website of the Commission on EMAS provides for general information concerning the EMAS registration process and EMAS Competent Bodies
These pages will be updated with further information, where necessary.
European Commission
irectorate
eneral for the Environment
Article
10 and 35(2) of the EMAS Regulation.
An application can only be introduced with an EU-27 EMAS Competent Body that is designated by the Member State to provide for and be responsible for the registration of organisations located outside the Community (Article 11(1) of the EMAS Regulation). Currently the following Member States provide for EMAS global registration: Finland, Germany, Spain, Italy, Denmark, Austria, Belgium and Portugal. In addition, the environmental verifier, which will carry out the verification and validate the environmental management system of the organisation, must be accredited or licensed in the Member State where the organisation applies for registration. (Article 3(3) of the EMAS Regulation).
According to Article 3(2) of the EMAS Regulor management centre designated for the purpose of the corporate registration, is located in an EU-27 Member State and (ii) the application for corporate registration is made to the Competent Body of that Member State.
EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL ENVIRONMENT
Brussels, 28 March 2018
OTICE TO STAKEHOLDER
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND THE EU
HIP RECYCLING REGULATION The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. This means that
unless a ratified withdrawal agreement
establishes another date, all Union primary and secondary law will cease to apply to the United Kingdom from 30 March 2019, 00:00h (CET) ('the withdrawal date').
The United Kingdom will then become a 'third country'.
Preparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for EU and national authorities but also for private parties
In view of the considerable uncertainties, in particular concerning the content of a possible withdrawal agreement, relevant stakeholders are reminded of legal repercussions, which need to be considered when the United Kingdom becomes a third country
Subject to any transitional arrangement that may be contained in a possible withdrawal agreement, as of the withdrawal date, the EU rules on ship recycling, and in  particular Regulation (EU) No 1257/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 20 November 2013 on ship recycling
no longer apply to the United Kingdom. This has in particular the following consequences:
According to Article 6(2)(a) of Regulation (EU) No 1257/2013, owners of ships flying the flag of a Member State
shall ensure that ships destined to be recycled are only
Negotiations are ongoing with the United Kingdom with a view to reaching a withdrawal agreement.
Furthermore, in accordance with Article 50(3) of the Treaty on European Union, the European Council, in agreement with the United Kingdom, may unanimously decide that the Treaties cease to apply at a later date.
A third country is a country not member of the EU.
OJ L 330, 10.12.2013, p. 1
5
This notice does not address EU rules on maritime transport. On these aspects, including controls in the framework of the EU port state control inspection system, see the "Notice to Stakeholders  Withdrawal of the United Kingdom and EU rules in the field of maritime transport" (https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness_en?page=1).
Article 2(1) of Regulation (EU) No 1257/2013.
2 recycled at ship recycling facilities that are included in the European List of ship  As of the withdrawal date, the entries in the European List
of ship recycling facilities for facilities located in the United Kingdom will become void. As a consequence, ships flying the flag of a Member State of the Union may no longer be recycled at these ship recycling facilities. The above is without prejudice to the possibility for the Commission to list facilities located in third countries in the European List in accordance with Article 16 of Regulation (EU) No 1257/2013.
The website of the Commission on the European Union's ship recycling policy (http://ec.europa.eu/environment/waste/ships/index.htm
provide
general information concerning shipments of waste and the recycling of specific waste streams. These pages will be updated with further information, where necessary.
European Commission Directorate-General Environment

Commission Implementing Decision (EU) 2016/2323 of 19 December 2016 establishing the European List of ship recycling facilities pursuant to Regulation (EU) No 1257/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council on ship recycling (OJ L 345, 20.12.2016, p. 119)
EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL ENVIRONMENT DIRECTORATE-GENERAL FOR INTERNAL MARKET, INDUSTRY, ENTREPRENEURSHIP AND SMES Brussels, 26 February 2019
OTICE TO STAKEHOLDER
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND EU RULES IN THE FIELD OF CHEMICALS REGULATION UNDER REACH The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. This means that as from 30 March 2019, 00:00h (CET)
the United Kingdom will be a third country
Preparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for EU and national authorities but also for private parties.  In view of the uncertainties surrounding the ratification of the Withdrawal Agreement, all interested parties, and especially economic operators, are reminded of legal repercussions, which need to be considered when the United Kingdom becomes a third country
Subject to the transition period provided for in the Withdrawal Agreement,
as of the withdrawal date, Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 December 2006 concerning the Registration, Evaluation, Authorisation and Restriction of Chemicals (REACH
and establishing a European Chemicals Agency,
will no longer apply to the United Kingdom. This has in particular the following consequences:

n accordance with Article 50(3) of the Treaty on European Union, the European Council, in agreement with the United Kingdom, may unanimously decide that the Treaties cease to apply at a later date.
A third country is a country not member of the EU.
This notice complements the comprehensive information provided by the European Chemicals Agency (ECHA) in respect of the withdrawal of the United Kingdom: https://echa.europa.eu/uk-withdrawal-from-the-eu
Cf. Part four of the Agreement on the withdrawal of the United Kingdom of Great Bri
in and Northern Ireland from the European Union and the European Atomic Energy Community
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=uriserv:OJ.CI.2019.066.01.0001.01.ENG&toc=OJ:C:2019:066I:TOC

OJ L 396, 30.12.2006, p. 1
2 1.
EGISTRATION 1.1. Registrations held by a registrant (manufacturer/producer, importer or Only Representative) established in the United Kingdom According to Article 5 of Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006, as a general rule, substances on their own, in mixtures or in article
manufactured or placed on the EU market in quantities of 1 tonne or more per year have to be registered with the European Chemicals Agency (ECHA). The registrant has to be established in the EU (Article 3(4), (9) and (11) of Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006). Where a manufacturer/producer is established in a third country, that manufacturer/producer may appoint a person acting as his rticle 8 of Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006). The Only Representative has to comply with the requirements set out in Article 8(2) of Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006, in particular as regards the keeping available of information with regard to quantities and supply of the registered substances. As of the withdrawal date, a registration held by a registrant (manufacturer/producer, importer or Only Representative) established in the United Kingdom is no longer valid in the EU
Therefore, manufacturers/producers established in the United Kingdom should
transfer the registration to a manufacturer or importer in the EU-27; or  appoint an Only Representative in the EU-27 as registrant for the substance. ECHA has published detailed guidance on how to transfer a registration prior to the withdrawal of the United Kingdom.
Manufacturers/producers established in a third country and using an Only Representative established in the United Kingdom should transfer the registration to an Only Representative in the EU-27. Importers established in the United Kingdom and supplying substances, mixtures or articles to the EU-27 should take steps to ensure that the manufacturer/producer in the third country from which they are importing appoint an Only Representative in the EU-27 as registrant for the substance. 1.2. Relevance for downstream users in the EU-27 According to Article
of Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006, a downstream user may only use a substance or mixture in quantities of 1 tonne or more per year that has been registered in accordance with that Regulation

https://echa.europa.eu/documents/10162/13552/how_to_transfer_uk_reach_registrations_en.pdf/1fb443ce-79de-6596-aae5-3f1033f1a5fb
Moreover, as of the withdrawal date, a substance not registered  in accordance with Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006 can no longer be imported into the EU-27 in quantities of 1 tonne or more per year
Therefore, downstream users should assess whether the substance used is registered by a registrant established in the EU-27. Where this is not the case, the downstream user should

dapt the supply chain accordingly (i.e. identify an alternative supplier)

ontact the registrant to ensure that the registrant plans to appoint an Only Representative; or
egister the substance in the capacity of importer or Only Representative appointed by the UK registrant. ECHA has published a list of all substances solely registered by legal entities established in the United Kingdom.
1.3. Joint submissions/lead registrant Article
11 and 19 of Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006 require the joint submission of a registration, with a Lead Registrant.  As set out in section 1.1 of this notice, as of the withdrawal date, the registration by a person established in the United Kingdom becomes invalid. If this person was the Lead Registrant
the steps set out above (section 1.1.) should be taken. If that Lead Registrant does not intend to take these steps
one of the other members of the joint submissions should take over the role of the Lead Registrant. 2.
UTHORISATION 2.1. Authorisation holders and authorisation applicants established in the United Kingdom According to Article 56(1) of Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006, the use and placing on the market of substances listed in Annex XIV to that Regulation require an authorisation by the Commission to be placed on the market or used
According to Article 62(2) in conjunction with Article 3(9)
(11) and (13) of Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006, the applicant for an authorisation and the authorisation holder have to be established in the EU. As of the withdrawal date, an application for an authorisation submitted by
or an authorisation held by a person established in the United Kingdom is no longer valid in the EU

https://echa.europa.eu/advice-to-companies
4 Where the application for authorisation or authorisation decision covers uses by actors downstream in accordance with Article 56(2) of Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006, the end of validity of the application/authorisation will also affect those operators established in the EU-27 who will no longer be covered by the application/authorisation.  There are no adopted authorisation decisions falling under this scenario. Regarding pending authorisation applications falling under this scenario, in order to ensure that the downstream users are covered by the application, the UK-based applicant should ensure that
the application is transferred before the withdrawal date to a legal entity established in the EU-27. Such a transfer must be the result of a change of legal entity (for example, as the result of a merger, a split or an asset sale), and the person to whom the application is transferred must qualif
as manufacturer, importer or downstream user of the substances within the scope of the application for authorisation; or  the application is transferred to an Only Representative established in the  EU-27 with effect o
the withdrawal date. The applicant has to notify ECHA of the legal entity change before the withdrawal date. 2.2.
Relevance for downstream users in the EU-27 According to Article 56(2
of Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006, the authorisation may encompass the downstream use of a substance. Therefore, downstream users subject to authorisation should assess whether the applicant for authorisation covering their use is established in the United Kingdom. In this case, the downstream user should contact the applicant for authorisation in order to ensure that the latter takes the steps set out under section 2.1 of this notice
Alternatively, where the application for other EU-27 legal entities, the downstream user may get the substance supplied  from an EU-based co-applicant.
The -website of ECHA (https://echa.europa.eu/uk-withdrawal-from-the-eu) as well as the Commission website on Chemicals (http://ec.europa.eu/environment/chemicals/reach/reach_en.htm) provide additional information. These pages will be updated with further information, where necessary.
European Commission
irectorate
eneral environment Directorate
eneral for internal market, industry, entrepreneurship and SME

EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL FOR FINANCIAL STABILITY, FINANCIAL SERVICES AND CAPITAL MARKETS UNION
Brussels, 8 February 2018
OTICE TO STAKEHOLDER
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND EU RULES IN THE FIELD OF STATUTORY AUDIT The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. This means that, unless a ratified withdrawal agreement
establishes another date, all Union primary and secondary law will cease to apply to the United Kingdom from 30 March 2019, 00:00h (CET) ('the withdrawal date')
The United Kingdom will then become a 'third country'.
Preparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for EU and national authorities but also for private parties.  In view of the considerable uncertainties, in particular concerning the content of a possible withdrawal agreement, statutory auditors and companies subject to audit requirements are reminded of legal repercussions which need to be considered when the United Kingdom becomes a third country.
Subject to any transitional arrangement that may be contained in a possible withdrawal agreement, as of the withdrawal date, the EU rules in the field of statutory audit (in particular the Statutory Audit Directive5) no longer apply to the United Kingdom. This has in particular the following consequences:
Negotiations are ongoing with the United Kingdom with a view to reaching a withdrawal agreement.
Furthermore, in accordance with Article 50(3) of the Treaty on European Union, the European Council, in agreement with the United Kingdom, may unanimously decide that the Treaties cease to apply at a later date.
A third country is a country not member of the EU.
For procedures on the approval of statutory auditors pursuant to Article 14 of the Statutory Audit Directive that are ongoing on the withdrawal date, the "Joint report from the negotiators of the European Union and the United Kingdom Government on progress during phase 1 of negotiations under Article 50 TEU on the United Kingdom's orderly withdrawal from the European Union" establishes that, in respect of the persons covered in that report, these procedures will be completed under Union law (paragraph 32): https://ec.europa.eu/commission/publications/joint-report-negotiators-european-union-and-united-kingdom-government-progress-during-phase
-negotiations-under-article-50-teu-united-kingdom
orderly-withdrawal-european-union_en
5
Directive 2006/43/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 17 May 2006 on statutory audits of annual accounts and consolidated accounts, OJ L 157, 9.6.2006, p. 87.
2 1.
NTITLEMENT TO CARRY OUT STATUTORY AUDITS IN THE EU  As of the withdrawal date, natural persons approved as auditors by the United Kingdom (United Kingdom auditors) will be considered third country auditors and they will no longer be considered statutory auditors for the purpose of the Statutory Audit Directive.
Audit entities approved by the United Kingdom (United Kingdom audit entities) will be considered third country audit entities and will no longer be considered audit firms for the purpose of the Statutory Audit Directive. Neither United Kingdom auditors nor United Kingdom audit entities will be entitled to carry out statutory audits required by the law of a Member State in accordance with the Statutory Audit Directive.  An audit firm approved in a Member State (EU-27) should carefully examine whether it will continue, as of the withdrawal date, complying with the conditions set out in Article 3(4) of the Statutory Audit Directive, in particular in relation to voting rights and members of the administrative or management body of the audit firm
2.
EGISTRATION OF THIRD-COUNTRY AUDITORS AND AUDIT ENTITIES  As of the withdrawal date, a United Kingdom auditor or United Kingdom audit entity providing an audit report concerning the annual or consolidated accounts of a company incorporated outside the EU whose transferable securities are admitted to trading on a regulated market
of an EU Member State will have to be registered in that Member State as third country auditor or third country audit firm8, in accordance with Article 45 of the Statutory Audit Directive.   Failing such registration, any such audit report will have no legal effect in the Member State concerned.  United Kingdom auditors or United Kingdom audit entities registered in accordance with Article 45 of the Statutory Audit Directive will in principle be subject to the systems of public oversight, quality assurance and investigation and penalties of the Member State of registration (cf. Article 45(3) of the Statutory Audit Directive).
3.
THER ASPECTS  Statutory audit of consolidated accounts of undertakings in the EU that have subsidiaries in the United Kingdom: In accordance with Article 27 (on statutory audits of consolidated financial statements) of the Statutory Audit Directive, the
Under Article 44 of the Statutory Audit Directive, a United Kingdom auditor could seek, as a third country auditor, to be approved as a statutory auditor by a Member State subject however to, inter alia, reciprocity. The third country auditors approved under Article 44 of the Statutory Audit Directive are subject to supervision by the relevant Member State authorities.
Except for issuers of high value-denominated debt securities (cf. Article 45(1) of the Statutory Audit Directive).
Article 16(2) and 17(2) of the Statutory Audit Directive.
Without prejudice to derogation in the case of equivalence (cf. Article 46 of the Statutory Audit Directive).
3 statutory auditor or audit firm approved in a Member State acting as group auditor of an undertaking in the EU will need to take into account, in respect of the audit of that undertaking's subsidiaries in the United Kingdom, that the relevant United Kingdom auditor or United Kingdom audit entity will be considered as third-country auditor or third-country audit entity for the purpose of the requirements of that Article (e.g. the audit work of the United Kingdom auditor or United Kingdom audit entity will be subject to evaluation and review by the group auditor).  Cooperation of EU statutory auditors and audit firms with competent authorities of the United Kingdom: In accordance with Article 23(5), second subparagraph (on confidentiality and professional secrecy) of the Statutory Audit Directive, the statutory auditor or audit firm approved in a Member State that carries out the statutory audit of an undertaking in the EU which forms part of a group of undertakings whose parent undertaking is in the United Kingdom or of an undertaking in the EU which has issued securities in the United Kingdom may only transfer audit working papers or other documents related to the audit of the audited undertaking in the EU to the competent authorities of the United Kingdom under the conditions set out in Article 47 of the Statutory Audit Directive. In particular, this requires the agreement of the Member State concerned and the existence of reciprocity arrangements between the competent authorities.
The above is without prejudice to the possibility for the competent authority of a Member State to approve a third country auditor as statutory auditor in accordance with Article 44 of the Statutory Audit Directive
The website of the Commission on auditing of companies' financial statements (https://ec.europa.eu/info/business-economy-euro/company-reporting-and-auditing/auditing-companies-financial-statements_en) provide for general information concerning statutory audits. These pages will be updated with further information, where necessary.
European Commission Directorate-General for Financial Stability, Financial Services and Capital Markets Union
EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL FOR FINANCIAL STABILITY, FINANCIAL SERVICES  AND CAPITAL MARKETS UNION
Brussels, 8 February 2018
OTICE TO STAKEHOLDER
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND EU RULES IN THE FIELD OF CREDIT RATING AGENCIES The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. This means that, unless a ratified withdrawal agreement
establishes another date, all Union primary and secondary law will cease to apply to the United Kingdom from 30 March 2019, 00:00h (CET) ('the withdrawal date').
The United Kingdom will then become a 'third country'.
Preparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for EU and national authorities but also for private parties. In view of the considerable uncertainties, in particular concerning the content of a possible withdrawal agreement, credit rating agencies, institutions and financial market participants are reminded of legal repercussions, which need to considered when the United Kingdom becomes a third country. Subject to any transitional arrangement that may be contained in a possible withdrawal agreement, as of the withdrawal date, the EU rules in the field of the Credit Ratings Agencies (CRAs) and in particular Regulation (EC) No 1060/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 September 2009 on credit rating agencies
("CRA Regulation") no longer apply to the United Kingdom.  This has in particular the following consequences:  Deregistration. In accordance with Article 4(1) of the CRA Regulation, CRAs established in the EU need to be registered and supervised by the European Securities and Markets Authority (ESMA), in order for their ratings to be recognised for regulatory purposes in the EU. As CRAs established in the United Kingdom will no longer be considered established in the EU, ESMA will have to
Negotiations are ongoing with the United Kingdom with a view to reaching a withdrawal agreement.
Furthermore, in accordance with Article 50(3) of the Treaty on European Union, the European Council, in agreement with the United Kingdom, may unanimously decide that the Treaties cease to apply at a later date.
A third country is a country not member of the EU.
OJ L 302, 17.11.2009, p. 1.
2 withdraw their registration
with effect on the withdrawal date, in accordance with Articles 14 and 20 of the CRA Regulation.
Use of ratings for regulatory purposes. As a consequence of UK established redit institutions, investment firms, insurance undertakings, reinsurance undertakings, institutions for occupational retirement provision, management companies, investment companies, alternative investment fund managers and central counterparties in the EU-27 will no longer be able to use ratings issued by these CRAs for regulatory purposes (e.g. Solvency II for insurance undertaking, Capital Requirements Regulation for credit institutions).
Endorsement. Ratings issued by a CRA established in a third country which is part of a group to which a CRA established in the EU and registered by ESMA belongs can be "endorsed" provided that certain conditions are met in accordance with Article 4(3) CRA Regulation, e.g. the conduct of the credit ratings activities by CRA established in a third country fulfils requirements which are at least as stringent as the EU specific framework, there is an objective reason for the rating to be elaborated in the third country and there is an appropriate cooperation arrangement between ESMA and the relevant supervisory authority. When "endorsed", ratings may be used for regulatory purposes.
Prospectus. In accordance with Article 4(1) of the CRA Regulation where a prospectus contains a reference to a credit rating or credit ratings issued by a CRA established in the United Kingdom, it will need to include clear and prominent information stating that those credit ratings are not issued by a credit rating agency established in the EU and registered under the CRA Regulation.
This notice is without prejudice to any equivalence decisions that may be adopted by the EU
The website of the Commission on regulating credit rating agencies (https://ec.europa.eu/info/business-economy-euro/banking-and-finance/financial-supervision-and-risk-management/managing-risks-banks-and-financial-institutions/regulating-credit-rating-agencies_en) provide for general information concerning CRAs. These pages will be updated with further information, where necessary.
European Commission Directorate-General for Financial Stability, Financial Services and Capital Markets Union

Article 5 of the CRA Regulation.
EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL FOR FINANCIAL STABILITY, FINANCIAL SERVICES  AND CAPITAL MARKETS UNION
Brussels, 8 February 2018 Rev1
OTICE TO STAKEHOLDER
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND EU RULES IN THE FIELD OF ASSET MANAGEMENT The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. This means that, unless a ratified withdrawal agreement
establishes another date, all Union primary and secondary law will cease to apply to the United Kingdom from 30 March 2019, 00:00h (CET) ('the withdrawal date').
The United Kingdom will then become a 'third country'.
Preparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for EU and national authorities but also for private parties.  In view of the considerable uncertainties, in particular concerning the content of a possible withdrawal agreement, stakeholders, including managers of investment funds and investors are reminded of legal repercussions which need to be considered when the United Kingdom becomes a third country. Subject to any transitional arrangement that may be contained in a possible withdrawal agreement, as of the withdrawal date, the EU rules in the field of asset management, in particular Directive 2009/65/EC on Undertakings for Collective Investment in Transferable Securities
and Directive 2011/61/EU on Alternative Investment Funds Managers
no longer apply to the United Kingdom.  This has in particular the following consequences:

Negotiations are ongoing with the United Kingdom with a view to reaching a withdrawal agreement.
Furthermore, in accordance with Article 50(3) of the Treaty on European Union, the European Council, in agreement with the United Kingdom, may unanimously decide that the Treaties cease to apply at a later date.
A third country is a country not member of the EU.
Directive 2009/65/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 July 2009 on the coordination of laws, regulations and administrative provisions relating to undertakings for collective investment in transferable securities (UCITS) OJ L 302, 17.11.2009, p. 32.
Directive 2011/61/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 8 June 2011 on Alternative Investment Fund Managers, OJ L 174, 1.7.2011, p. 1.
See also the "Notice to stakeholders
ithdrawal of the United Kingdom and EU rules in the field of Markets in Financial Instruments" (https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness_en).

1. UK ASSET MANAGEMENT ACTIVITY  UK UCITS management companies and UK AIF managers will no longer benefit from authorisation
(they will lose the so-called "EU passport") and will be treated as third-country AIF managers. This means that those UK entities will no longer be able to manage funds and market funds in the EU on the basis of their current authorisations
o For UCITS, EuVECA, EuSEF and ELTIF, both the investment funds and their managers must be established and registered or authorised in the EU to manage and market funds to retail
and professional investors across the Union.
AIF managers need to be established and authorised in the EU to be allowed to manage and market AIFs to professional investors across the EU.
As a consequence, all collective investment undertakings registered or authorised in the United Kingdom will be non-EU alternative investment funds (non-EU AIFs). This applies to:
Undertakings for Collective Investment in Transferable Securities (UCITS)
Alternative investment funds (AIFs)
European Venture Capital Funds (EuVECA);

European Social Entrepreneurship Funds (EuSEF);10
European Long Term Investment Funds (ELTIF);11 and
Money Market Funds (MMF).12
Member States may allow AIF managers who are not established and authorised in the EU to market AIFs (EU AIFs and non-EU AIFs) only in their territory under the so-called National Private Placement regimes13
hereafter "NPPR"). Directive 2011/61/EU provides Member States with discretion as to whether to activate NPPR and allow for stricter rules in addition to the minimum requirements in that Directive. Some Member States do not allow for the NPPR, while other Member States only allow marketing to professional investors.

Article 6 of Directive 2009/65/EC, Article 6 of Directive 2011/61/EU
8 EuVECA and EuSEF can only be marketed to retail investors subject to limitations in Article 6 of Regulation (EU) No 345/2013 and Article 6 of Regulation (EU) No 346/2013. ELTIF can only be marketed to retail investors subject to limitations in Article 28 of Regulation (EU) 2015/760.
Regulation (EU) No 345/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 17 April 2013 on European venture capital funds, OJ L 115, 25.4.2013, p. 1
10
Regulation (EU) No 346/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 17 April 2013 on European social entrepreneurship funds , OJ L 115, 25.4.2013, p. 18
11
Regulation (EU) 2015/760 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 29 April 2015 on European long-term investment funds
OJ L 123, 19.5.2015, p. 98
12
Regulation (EU) 2017/1131 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 14 June 2017 on money market funds, OJ L 169, 30.6.2017, p. 8. 13 Under NPPRs, third country entities do not benefit from the EU passports in the single market framework as each NPPR is valid only for the Member State concerned. Directive 2011/61/EU includes a minimum set of conditions under NPPR for (i) third country entities (e.g. non-EU managers should comply with some requirements of Directive 2011/61/EU such as annual report, disclosure to investors and reporting), and (ii) for the third country (e.g. appropriate cooperation agreements must be in place between the EU competent authority and the relevant third country authorities).
3  UCITS management companies or AIF managers authorised by EU-27 competent authorities in accordance with Article 6 of Directive 2009/65/EC or Article 6 of Directive 2011/61/EU which are subsidiaries of entities established in the United Kingdom (legally independent companies established in EU-27 controlled by or affiliated to entities established in the United Kingdom) can continue to operate on the basis of their authorisation as UCITS management companies or AIF managers in the EU-27.
Branches of UK managers (permanent presences which are not legally independent from the AIF manager) in the EU will be treated as branches of a non-EU AIF managers as of the withdrawal date. These branches will be subject to the requirements of NPPRs, where available.
2. EU ASSET MANAGEMENT ACTIVITY  As of the withdrawal date, UCITS and AIFs authorised or registered in the United Kingdom in accordance with the Directive 2009/65/EC or Directive 2011/61/EU will be non-EU AIFs (see above)
EU-27 UCITS management companies managing those (former) UCITS authorised in the UK will need to obtain an authorisation according to Article 6 of Directive 2011/61/EU to manage non-EU AIFs.
The management, by AIF managers established and authorised or registered in the EU, of non-EU AIFs that are not marketed in the EU must comply with Directive 2011/61/EU (except depositary and annual report rules) and cooperation agreements for exchange of information between EU competent authorities and the relevant third country authorities (Article 34 of Directive 2011/61/EU).
According to Article 36 of Directive 2011/61/EU, the marketing of non-EU AIFs managed by an AIF manager established and authorised or registered in the EU is subject to the NPPR, which is an option for Member States. Stricter rules may be imposed on this category of AIF managers by Member States.
According to the rules on disclosure to investors in Directive 2009/65/EC and Directive 2011/61/EU, UCITS management companies and AIF managers must take a number of steps to inform investors of the consequences of the withdrawal of the United Kingdom from the EU, in particular:
-
According to Article 22 of Directive 2011/61/EU, AIF managers must include in the annual report any material change to the information to be disclosed to investors, which includes, but is not limited to, the legal implications of the contractual relationship.
-
According to Article 78 of Directive 2009/65/EC, UCITS management companies must prepare a key investor information document whose essential elements must be kept up to date. This includes information on Member States in which the management company is authorised, where the UCITS is managed or marketed cross-border.
4 Therefore, UCITS management companies and AIF managers must assess whether the change of the legal status of the investment fund would still be compliant with the investment strategy of the fund as communicated earlier to investors.  As regards the assets in which EU funds invest, Directive 2009/65/EC and Directive 2011/61/EU do not prohibit investment in eligible assets located outside the EU. Nevertheless, there will be restrictions to fund-of-funds structures; in particular UCITS authorised in the EU-27 must assess the eligibility of (former) UCITS authorised in the United Kingdom.14
EU investors should review their investment criteria to assess compliance with the change in the legal status of the funds they invested into (e.g. non-EU AIF instead of UCITS).
The delegation of certain operational functions to providers established in the United Kingdom may be undertaken provided that the relevant requirements in Directive 2009/65/EC and Directive 2011/61/EU are complied with.15 In particular, where the delegation concerns portfolio management or risk management (or investment management for UCITS) and is conferred on an undertaking established in a third country, a cooperation agreement between the competent authority of the home Member State of the UCITS management company or AIF manager and the supervisory authority of the undertaking carrying out the delegated function in the third country must be in place. Moreover, the European Securities and Markets Authority (ESMA
has issued an opinion with specific clarifications on these matters, in particular on the risks of letter-box entities which may arise from the use of outsourcing arrangements or from the use of non-EU branches for the performance of functions/services with respect to EU clients. The use of non-EU branches needs to be based on objective reasons linked to the services provided in the non-EU jurisdiction and may not result in a situation where such non-EU branches perform material functions or provide material services back into the EU.16
According to Article 21 of Directive 2011/61/EU and Article 23 of Directive 2009/65/EC, the depository of EU AIF and UCITS authorised in the EU must be located in the home Member State of the fund. Article 22a of Directive 2009/65/EC and Article 21(11) of Directive 2011/61/EU lay down requirements for delegation of safekeeping functions to a third party. Where the safekeeping functions have been delegated to an entity established in the United Kingdom, the following applies inter alia
14 Assessment of eligibility in accordance with Article
52 and 55 of Directive 2009/65/EC. 15
Article 20 of Directive 2011/61/EU specified by Articles 75 to 82 of the Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 231/2013 and Article 13 UCITS. As part of the review of the European Supervisory Authorities ("ESAs") adopted on 20 September 2017, the Commission has proposed reinforced coordination by the ESAs in relation to delegation and outsourcing of activities as well as of risk transfers (COM(2017)536 final).
16
ESMA opinion to support supervisory convergence in the area of investment management in the context of the United Kingdom withdrawing from the European Union (13 July 2017) (https://www.esma.europa.eu/document/opinion-support-supervisory-convergence-in-area-investment-management-in-context-united).

- UCITS depositaries need to demonstrate objective reasons for delegation and to ensure that in the event of an insolvency of that third party, the assets held in custody are unavailable for distribution among, or realisation for the benefit of, its creditors;17
Non-EU AIF managed by an AIF manager established and authorised in the EU can appoint a depositary in the third country of the non-EU AIF subject to specific requirements.18
This notice is without prejudice to the "third country passport" regime laid down in the Directive 2011/61/EU.19 The website of the Commission on investment funds (https://ec.europa.eu/info/business-economy-euro/growth-and-investment/investment-funds_en) provides for general information concerning asset management. These pages will be updated with further information, where necessary.
European Commission Directorate-General for Financial Stability, Financial Services and Capital Markets Union                                                  17 Article 17 of Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2016/438.  18 Article 21(6) of Directive 2011/61/EU.  19 Articles 37 and 40 of Directive 2011/61/EU for the marketing of non-EU AIFs by non-EU AIF managers,  Articles 37 and 39 of Directive 2011/61/EU for the management of EU AIFs or marketing of EU AIFs by non-EU AIF managers.
EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL FOR FINANCIAL STABILITY, FINANCIAL SERVICES  AND CAPITAL MARKETS UNION
Brussels, 8 February 2018
OTICE TO STAKEHOLDER
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND EU RULES IN THE FIELD OF POST
RADE
INANCIAL SERVICES The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. This means that
unless a ratified withdrawal agreemen
establishes another date, all Union primary and secondary law will cease to apply to the United Kingdom from 30 March 2019, 00:00h (CET) ('the withdrawal date').
The United Kingdom will then become a 'third country'.
Preparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for EU and national authorities but also for private parties.  In view of the considerable uncertainties, in particular concerning the content of a possible withdrawal agreement
all stakeholders are reminded of legal repercussions which need to be considered when the United Kingdom becomes a third country. Subject to any transitional arrangement that may be contained in a possible withdrawal agreement, as of the withdrawal date, EU rules on financial markets, in particular Regulation (EU) No 648/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 4 July 2012 on OTC derivatives, central counterparties and trade repositories
(EMIR)5, Regulation (EU) No 600/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 May 2014 on markets in financial instruments and amending Regulation (EU) No 648/2012
(MIFIR), Regulation (EU) 2015/2365 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 November 2015 on transparency of securities financing transactions and of reuse and
Negotiations are ongoing with the United Kingdom with a view to reaching a withdrawal agreement.

n accordance with Article 50(3) of the Treaty on European Union, the European Council, in agreement with the United Kingdom, may unanimously decide that the Treaties cease to apply at a later date.
A third country is a country which is not
Member State of the EU
4
OJ L 201, 27.7.2012, p. 1.
Including, once agreed by the European Parliament and the Council, the Commission proposal (COM (2017) 331
for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Regulation (EU) No 1095/2010 establishing a European Supervisory Authority (European Securities and Markets Authority) and amending Regulation (EU) No 648/2012 as regards the procedures and authorities involved for the authorisation of CCPs and requirements for the recognition of third-country CCPs.
OJ L 173, 12.6.2014, p. 84.
amending Regulation (EU) No 648/2012
(SFTR)
Directive 98/26/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 19 May 1998 on settlement finality in payment and securities settlement systems
(SFD), no longer apply to the United Kingdom.  1.
ERIVATIVES   As of the withdrawal date, derivatives traded on a UK regulated market will no longer fulfil the definition of exchange traded derivatives (ETDs) under EU law. According to Article 2(32) of
FIR
ETDs are derivatives traded on
EU regulated market, or on a third-country market considered to be equivalent.
Thus, under EU law10, as of the withdrawal date, ETDs traded on a UK regulated market will be over-the-counter (OTC
derivative contracts.
An ETD that becomes an OTC derivative will thus become subject to all EMIR requirements applicable to OTC derivatives transactions: all OTC derivatives transactions count towards the calculation of the clearing threshold in accordance with the provisions of EMIR11
and will be subject to the EMIR clearing obligation where one has been adopted12 as well as certain risk mitigation techniques (notably the exchange of margins).
OTC derivatives that are subject to the clearing obligation must be cleared by a central counterparty
CCP
which is authorised and established in a Member State of the EU or a CCP established in a third-country and which is recognised by the European Securities and Markets Authority (ESMA) under Article 25 of EMIR to clear that class of OTC derivative.13 As of the withdrawal date, CCPs established in the United Kingdom will be third-country CCPs which would need to be recognised under EMIR before they could be used to fulfil the clearing obligation.14 Counterparties will not be
OJ L 337, 23.12.2015, p. 1.
OJ L 166, 11.6.1998, p. 45
9
An ETD is "a derivative that is traded on a regulated market or on a third-country market considered to derivative as defined in Article 2(7) of EMIR", see Article 2(32) of MIFIR. 10
OTC derivative contracts are those not traded on an EU regulated market or traded on third-country regulated market that is not subject to an equivalence decision
See Article 2(7) and Article 2a of EMIR. 11
See, in particular, Articles 2a, 13, 25 and 75 of EMIR. 12
The following products are currently subject to a clearing obligation: interest rate swaps in Euro, Japanese Yen, US Dollar, Norwegian Krona, Polish Zloty and Swedish Krona; and index credit default swaps. 13
See Article 4(3) of EMIR.  14
See Article 4(3) of EMIR and, once agreed by the European Parliament and the Council, the proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Regulation (EU) No 1095/2010 establishing a European Supervisory Authority (European Securities and Markets Authority) and amending Regulation (EU) No 648/2012 as regards the procedures and authorities involved for the authorisation of CCPs and requirements for the recognition of third-country CCP
and the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Regulation (EU) No 648/2012 as regards the clearing obligation, the suspension of the clearing obligation, the reporting requirements, the risk-mitigation techniques for OTC derivatives contracts not cleared by a central
able to fulfil their clearing obligation under EMIR in
CPs established in the United Kingdom as long as those CCPs are not recognised by ESMA under EMIR
The obligation to clear transactions through an authorised CCP established in the EU or
recognised CCP established in a third country also applies to counterparties established in third countries, where the contract has a direct, substantial and foreseeable effect within the EU or where such an obligation is necessary or appropriate to prevent the evasion of any provisions of EMIR.15
The loss of EU authorisation of CCPs established in the United Kingdom will affect their ability to continue performing certain activities (e.g. compression) and fulfilling certain obligations (e.g. default management) with regard to contracts concluded before the withdrawal date
A higher capital charge will apply to exposures resulting from positions in derivatives held by credit institutions and investment firms established in the EU in non-recognised CCPs established in third countries16. This is because only authorised CCPs established in the EU and recognised CCPs established in a third country are qualifying CCPs17
QCCPs
which have a favourable treatment under CRR.18
Counterparties in the EU and counterparties in third countries to which the clearing obligation applies should therefore examine their derivatives portfolios. All counterparties (including counterparties established in third countries)
be they a financial institution or a non-financial company above the clearing threshold, should ensure that they fulfil the clearing requirements. Where derivatives are concluded via an intermediary or cleared via an intermediary (i.e. clearing member, client of a clearing member or an indirect client), counterparties should ensure that their contract with that intermediary
uly complies with the applicable legal requirements.  2.
RADE REPOSITORIES AND REPORTING  Derivatives or securities financing transactions which are subject to the reporting obligation under EMIR or SFTR must be reported by counterparties to an EU                                                                                                                                                  counterparty, the registration and supervision of trade repositories and the requirements for trade repositories
15
For further details, see Article 4 EMIR and Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 285/2014 of 13 February 2014 supplementing Regulation (EU) No 648/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council with regard to regulatory technical standards on direct, substantial and foreseeable effect of contracts within the Union and to prevent the evasion of rules and obligations, OJ L 85, 21.3.2014, p.1
16
See Articles 300 to 311 Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 June 2013 on prudential requirements for credit institutions and investment firms and amending Regulation (EU) No 648/2012 (CRR). 17
See Article 497 of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 June 2013 on prudential requirements for credit institutions and investment firms and amending Regulation (EU) No 648/2012 (CRR). 18
See Article 4(1)(88) of CRR, subject to the transitional provisions of Article 497 of CRR and Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2017/2241 of 6 December 2017 (transitional period lasts for third-country CCPs until 15 June 2018)
4 registered trade repository or to a third-country trade repository recognised by the European Securities and Markets Authority (ESMA) under Article 77 of EMIR.19 As of the withdrawal date, trade repositories established in the United Kingdom will be third
ountry trade repositories.   The obligation to report a derivative contract to a duly registered or recognised trade repository is addressed to the counterparties. All counterparties, be they financial or non-financial, must ensure that this requirement is fulfilled. Where reporting to a trade repository is delegated to a third party, counterparties should ensure that their contract guarantees compliance with all applicable legal requirements in EMIR and/or SFTR.  The requirement for counterparties to keep a record of any derivative contract that has been concluded and of any modification thereto must continue to be fulfilled by counterparties for at least five years following the termination of the contract.20
Systems will no longer be able to be designated by the United Kingdom under the Settlement Finality Directive.21 As of the withdrawal date, systems currently designated by the United Kingdom will lose their designation under the Settlement Finality Directive along with the rights and benefits that entails for them and their participants. This is without prejudice to any specific provisions in national law of Member States.22
This notice is without prejudice to any equivalence decisions that may be adopted by the EU.23 The website of the Commission on Post-trade services
https://ec.europa.eu/info/business-economy-euro/banking-and-finance/financial-markets/post-trade-services_en) provide
for general information concerning post-trade services. These pages will be updated with further information, where necessary.
European Commission Directorate-General for Financial Stability, Financial Services and Capital Markets Union                                                  19
See Article 9 of EMIR and Article
of SFTR.  20
See Article 9(2) of EMIR. 21
See Article 2(a) of Directive 98/26/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 19 May 1998 on settlement finality in payment and securities settlement systems (SFD). 22
See Recital 7 of the SFD. 23
See in particular Articles 2a, 13, 25 and 75 EMIR.
EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL FOR FINANCIAL STABILITY, FINANCIAL SERVICES  AND CAPITAL MARKETS UNION Brussels, 8 February 2018
OTICE TO STAKEHOLDERS
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND EU RULES IN THE FIELD OF MARKETS IN FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. This means that
unless a ratified withdrawal agreement
establishes another date
all Union primary and secondary law will cease to apply to the United Kingdom from 30 March 2019, 00:00h (CET) ('the withdrawal date').
The United Kingdom will then become a 'third country'.
Preparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for EU and national authorities but also for private parties.  In view of the considerable uncertainties, in particular concerning the content of a possible withdrawal agreement, stakeholders are reminded of legal repercussions which need to be considered when the United Kingdom becomes a third country. Subject to any transitional arrangement that may be contained in a possible withdrawal agreement, as of the withdrawal date, the EU rules in the field of MiFID investment services and activities
no longer apply to the United Kingdom. This has in particular the following consequences

Negotiations are ongoing with the United Kingdom with a view to reaching a withdrawal agreement.
Furthermore, in accordance with Article 50(3) of the Treaty on European Union, the European Council, in agreement with the United Kingdom, may unanimously decide that the Treaties cease to apply at a later date.
A third country is a country not member of the EU.
Directive 2014/65/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 May 2014 on markets in financial instruments, OJ L 173, 12.6.2014, p. 349 (MiFID II), and Regulation (EU) No 600/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 May 2014 on markets in financial instruments, OJ L 173, 12.6.2014, p. 84 (MiFIR)
5
See also the "Notice to stakeholders  Withdrawal of the United Kingdom and EU rules in the field of asset management" (https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness_en).
1.
UTHORISATION
UK investment firms will no longer benefit from the MiFID authorisation
to provide MiFID investment services and activities in the Union
(they will lose the so-called "EU passport") and will be third-country firms. This means that those investment firms will no longer be allowed to provide services in the EU on the basis of their current authorisation
8  EU-27
ubsidiaries (legally independent companies established in EU-27 and controlled by or affiliated to investment firms established in the United Kingdom) can continue to operate as EU investment firms if they have a MiFID authorisation in one of the EU Member States. These firms, like any other MiFID firm, will comply with MiFID requirements amongst others in terms of substance requirements (including governance, outsourcing or the use of branches in a third-country to provide services back in the EU
9 Such firm's business model and structure (including links with non-EU entities) will be part of MiFID competent authorities' assessment (e.g. qualifying shareholders, the group business model/structure, the potential (prudential) consolidated supervision or lack thereof, etc.).
Branches in the EU-27 of UK established investment firms will be branches of third-country investment firms and will need to comply with national requirements applicable in the Member State where the branch is established or with the regime set in Article 39-41 MiFID II where applicable
The provision of services/activities is limited to that Member State's territory.
Article 5 MiFID II. Credit institutions authorised under Directive 2013/36/EU may also provide investment services and activities. Before granting an authorisation under Directive 2013/36/EU, relevant competent authorities should verify that they comply with relevant MiFID provisions. See Notice to stakeholders on the withdrawal of the United Kingdom and EU rules in the field of banking and payment services.
Annex I to MiFID II provides a list of services and activities and financial instruments covered by the MiFID framework.
The benefit of the MiFID passport will therefore be limited to investment firms established in the EU having obtained a MiFID authorisation in accordance with the authorisation and substance requirements set out in the MiFID framework. See also ESMA Opinion
General Principles to support supervisory convergence in the context of the UK withdrawing from the EU (https://www.esma.europa.eu/sites/default/files/library/esma42-110-433_general_principles_to_support_supervisory_convergence_in_the_context_of_the_uk_withdrawing_from_the_eu.pdf), ESMA Opinion to support supervisory convergence in the area of investment firms in the context of the United Kingdom withdrawing from the European Union
https://www.esma.europa.eu/document/opinion-support-supervisory-convergence-in-area-investment-firms-in-context-united-kingdom).
9
See also above ESMA opinions and specific clarifications on these matters
in particular on the risk
of letter-box entities which may arise from the use of outsourcing arrangements or from the use of non-EU branches for the performance of functions/services with respect to EU clients. The use of non-EU branches needs to be based on objective reasons linked to the services provided in the non-EU jurisdiction and does not result in a situation where such non-EU branches perform material functions or provide services back into the EU.
UK market operators/investment firms operating a trading venue or execution venue will no longer benefit from the MiFID authorisation/licence10. UK based regulated markets (RMs), multilateral trading facilities (MTFs
or systematic internalisers (SI) will thus cease to be eligible venues for trading shares subject to the MiFIR share trading obligation
EU counterparts can no longer undertake trades in shares subject to the trading obligation on such platforms.11 Similarly, UK based RMs, MTFs or organised trading facilities (OTFs
will cease to be eligible venues for the purposes of the MiFIR derivative
trading obligation12 and EU counterparts will no longer be able to undertake trades on these platforms. In both cases, EU counterparts would need to reassess their trading arrangements to ensure continue
compliance with their obligations under the MiFID framework
Where previously available, UK based trading venues and CCPs13 will no longer benefit from the open and non-discriminatory access to EU trading venues and EU central counterparties (CCPs) and to EU benchmarks respectively.  2.
ONTRACTS  The loss of MiFID authorisations may also impact relationships with EU clients/counterparts and may affect the ability of UK established firms to continue performing certain obligations and activities deriving from existing contracts.14 Under MiFID15 firms are required to take measures to ensure continuity in the performance of investment services and activities. To this end, firms should assess the impact of the withdrawal of the United Kingdom from the EU on their operations and identify and mitigate compliance risk
For instance, EU established firms dealing in financial instruments subject to the MiFID trading obligation would no longer be able to use certain UK established firms/venues. Also, clients can no longer have direct electronic access to EU established trading venues via UK established firms. Further, UK established UCITS will become non-EU AIFs and EU established investment firms may be no longer                                                  10
See Articles 5, 44 MiFID. Also see ESMA Opinion in the area of secondary markets in the context of the U
withdrawing from the EU (https://www.esma.europa.eu/sites/default/files/library/esma70-154-270_opinion_to_support_supervisory_convergence_in_the_area_of_secondary_markets_in_the_context_of_the_united_kingdom_withdrawing_from_the_european_union.pdf). 11
See Article 23 MiFIR on trading obligations. The EU trading obligation applies to shares listed on both exchanges in the recognised countries and in the EU ("dual listings"), on condition that trading in the EU constitutes a significant percentage of the
hare's global trading volume
12
Cf. Article 28 MiFIR. Derivatives subject to the trading obligation comprise of euro, dollar and pound interest rate swaps in the most common benchmark tenors, as well as index-based CDS
Commission Delegated Regulation
EU) 2017/2417). 13
Articles 35, 36, 37, 38 MiFIR.  14
Also considering applicable national rules. 15
Article 16(4) MiFID II.
able to distribute them to their clients, unless the relevant AIFMD provisions are complied with. 3.
THER ASPECTS
he outsourcing of certain operational functions to UK providers may be undertaken only when in compliance with relevant MiFID requirements.16
n particular, the outsourcing of functions related to portfolio management to UK entities will only be permitted where the conditions under Article 32 of the MiFID Delegated Regulation 2017/565 are met, including the requirement that cooperation arrangements between National Competent Authorities and UK competent authorities are in place
Moreover, the European Securities and Markets Authority (ESMA
has issued opinions with specific clarifications on these matters, in particular on the risks of letter-box entities which may arise from the use of outsourcing arrangements or from the use of non-EU branches for the performance of functions/services with respect to EU clients.17
In light of MiFID obligations on disclosure of information to clients, firms providing investment services are required to provide clients or potential clients with accurate disclosure, in good time and in any case before clients are bound by any contract, on the impact on the provision of services and investors' rights that may emerg
from the withdrawal of the United Kingdom from the EU including the upcoming loss by the firm of its MiFID authorisation.18
irms providing investment services are also required to notify client
in good time about any material change to the information already provided, including if any material changes occurs to the situation of the firm and any resulting consequences for contracts.19
According to Article 59 MiFID II, the provision of data reporting services20 requires an authorisation by the home Member State competent authority. UK based data                                                  16
Cf. Article 16(5) MiFID II as further detailed in Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2017/565 of 25 April 2016 supplementing Directive 2014/65/EU as regards organisational requirements and operating conditions for investment firms and defined terms for the purposes of that Directive ('MiFID Delegated Regulation 2017/565'), OJ L 87, 31.3.2017, p. 1. As part of the review of the European Supervisory Authorities ("ESAs") adopted on 20 September 2017, the Commission has proposed a coordination by ESAs in relation to delegation and outsourcing of activities as well as of risk transfers (COM(2017)536 final)
17
ESMA Opinion
General Principles to support supervisory convergence in the context of the UK withdrawing from the EU (31 May 2017) (https://www.esma.europa.eu/sites/default/files/library/esma42-110-433_general_principles_to_support_supervisory_convergence_in_the_context_of_the_uk_withdrawing_from_the_eu.pdf), ESMA Opinion to support supervisory convergence in the area of investment firms in the context of the United Kingdom withdrawing from the European Union (13 July 2017) (https://www.esma.europa.eu/document/opinion-support-supervisory-convergence-in-area-investment-firms-in-context-united-kingdom).  18
Articles 44, 46 MiFID Delegated Regulation 2017/565
19
Article 46 MiFID Delegated Regulation 2017/565
20
See Annex I, Section D, to MiFID II
5 reporting service providers which have not obtained a MiFID authorisation by a competent authority established in the EU will have to cease to serve EU markets.21
This notice is without prejudice to any equivalence decisions that may be adopted by the EU.22 The website of the Commission on Financial Markets https://ec.europa.eu/info/business-economy-euro/banking-and-finance/financial-markets_en provide
for general information concerning MiFID Investment services and activities. These pages will be updated with further information, where necessary.
European Commission
irectorate
eneral for Financial Stability, Financial Services and Capital Markets Union
21
It should be noted that there is no equivalence process provided for these services. 22
Articles 23, 28, 47 MiFIR.

EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL FOR FINANCIAL STABILITY, FINANCIAL SERVICES  AND CAPITAL MARKETS UNION
Brussels, 8 February 2018 Rev1
OTICE TO STAKEHOLDER
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND EU RULES IN THE FIELD OF BANKING AND PAYMENT SERVICES The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. This means that
unless a ratified withdrawal agreement
establishes another date, all Union primary and secondary law will cease to apply to the United Kingdom from 30 March 2019, 00:00h (CET) ('the withdrawal date').
The United Kingdom will then become a 'third country'.
Preparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for EU and national authorities but also for private parties.  In view of the considerable uncertainties, in particular concerning the content of a possible withdrawal agreement
stakeholders are reminded of legal repercussions, which need to be considered when the United Kingdom becomes a third country
Subject to any transitional arrangement that may be contained in a possible withdrawal agreement, as of the withdrawal date, the EU rules in the field of banking and payment services, including in particular
irective 2013/36/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 June 2013 on access to the activity of credit institutions and the prudential supervision of credit institutions and investment firms (CRD)4, Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 June 2013 on prudential requirements for credit institutions and investment firms (CRR)
and Directive (EU) 2015/2366 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 November 2015 on
Negotiations are ongoing with the United Kingdom with a view to reaching a withdrawal agreement.
Furthermore, in accordance with Article 50(3) of the Treaty on European Union, the European Council, in agreement with the United Kingdom, may unanimously decide that the Treaties cease to apply at a later date.
A third country is a country not member of the EU.
OJ L 176, 27.6.2013, p. 338
5
OJ L 176, 27.6.2013, p. 1.
2 payment services in the internal market (PSD)
will no longer apply to the United Kingdom. This has in particular the following consequences
1.
UTHORISATIONS  UK entities providing banking
and payment services
as well as e-money issuing,
will no longer benefit from the authorisation10 to provide those services and activities in the Union (they will lose the so-called "EU passport") and will be treated as third-country entities with regard to their possibility to establish branches11 or agents in the Member States. This means that those entities will no longer be allowed to provide services in the EU on the basis of their current authorisations.
Entities authorised by United Kingdom competent authorities which have established branches in other Member State
will have to comply, as of the withdrawal date, with the rules of the host Member State applicable to branches of entities having their head office in a third country12 including the requirement to be validly authorised by the relevant competent authority of the host Member State in accordance with these rules
This may imply the need to submit a
application for authorisation as a branch or subsidiary and potentially result into changes for depositors, for instance where deposit guarantee arrangements would need to change
Payment institutions authorised by United Kingdom competent authorities, as of the withdrawal date, will not be allowed to provide payment services in the territory of the Union cross-border or through the use of branches located in the Member States.13
Entities authorised by the competent authorities in the Union, including their branches, have to comply with the conditions of their authorisation on a continue
basis.14 Where entities authorised by a competent authority in the EU have established branches in the United Kingdom, these branches will have to comply with the scope
OJ L 337, 23.12.2015, p. 35.
See Article 8(1) CRD as well as Annex I of the CRD
Several activities listed in Annex I CRD are also covered by Directive 2014/65/EU and Regulation (EU) No 600/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 May 2014 on markets in financial instruments (MiFID II/MIFIR). This notice is without prejudice to any consideration on the framework for investment services and stakeholders should also refer to the
Notice to Stakeholders  Withdrawal of the United Kingdom and EU rules in the field of  Markets in Financial Instruments".
Articles 1, 2 and Annex I of Directive (EU) 2015/2366.
Directive 2009/110/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 September 2009 on the taking up, pursuit and prudential supervision of the business of electronic money institutions
10
Articles 39 of Directive 2013/36/EU and 11(9) of Directive (EU) 2015/2366
11
Articles 17 of Directive 2013/36/EU and 19(5) of Directive (EU) 2015/2366
12
Article 47 of Directive 2013/36/EU, Article 15 Directive 2014/49/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 April 2014 on deposit guarantee schemes (DGSD
Article 1(1)(a) of Directive (EU) 2015/2366
and 8 Directive 2009/110/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 September 2009 on the taking up, pursuit and prudential supervision of the business of electronic money institutions.  13
Articles 1(1), 11(1) and 37(1) of Directive (EU) 2015/2366
14
Articles 18(c) of Directive 2013/36/EU and 13(c) of Directive (EU) 2015/2366

of the authorisation granted to the entities of which they are an integral legal part. This includes compliance with regard to their programme of operations and structural organisation15 and the requirement that the effective exercise of supervisory functions is not prevented by difficulties involved in the enforcement of th
laws, regulations or administrative provisions of the third country.16 The services covered by the scope of the authorisation, including services provided by any branches of the authorised entity located in a third country, will continue to be subject to the supervisory power
of the competent authority which has granted the authorisation, including in particular the power to restrict or limit the business, operations or network of institutions or to request the divestment of activities that pose excessive risks to the soundness of an institution.17 The services provided by these branches will as well be subject to the relevant requirements which are set out in the EU legal framework.18
2.
RRANGEMENTS AND EXPOSURES  Arrangements which may affect the ability of entities authorised in the EU to have an autonomous risk management and control framework, and sufficient operational resilience
including trading and hedging capabilities
in crisis will have to be assessed19 by the competent authority which has granted the authorisation. The assessment will e.g. consider whether, as of the withdrawal date, entities authorised by a competent authority in the EU are allowed to continue to rely on outsourcing20 or supervisory arrangements21, exemptions from the application of large exposures22 or risk mitigation requirements23 involving counterparties established in the United Kingdom  including parent institutions or other institutions of the same group.  The prudential treatment of exposures to third parties established in the United Kingdom24 will also be affected as of the withdrawal date. This is without prejudice to any equivalence decision that may be adopted by the EU in relation to specific                                                  15
Articles 10 of Directive 2013/36/EU and 11(4) of Directive (EU) 2015/2366
16
Article 11(8) of Directive (EU) 2015/2366
17
Article 104(1)(e) of Directive 2013/36/EU and 11(5) of Directive (EU) 2015/2366
18
See "Notice to Stakeholders  Withdrawal of the United Kingdom and EU rules in the field of Markets in Financial Instruments". 19
This may imply the need to submit new applications for the respective treatments. 20
Article 11(8) and 19 of Directive (EU) 2015/2366 and article 8 of Directive 2009/110/EC.
21
Articles 127 of Directive 2013/36/EU; Articles
(1)(44), 7 and 32 of Directive 2014/59/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 May 2014 establishing a framework for the recovery and resolution of credit institutions and investment firms
22
Articles 400(2)(c) of Regulation (EU) N°575/2013, Articles 12 and 19 of Directive 2014/59/EU
and Article 5(1)(a)(i) of Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2015/63 of 21 October 2014 supplementing Directive 2014/59/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council with regard to ex ante contributions to resolution financing arrangements
23
Article 11 Regulation (EU) No 648/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 4 July 2012 on OTC derivatives, central counterparties and trade repositories (EMIR
24
See e.g. Articles 107, 114, 115, 116, 132, 142
143(1), 151(4) and (9), 283, 312(2
363 of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013

prudential treatment referred to in the CRD.25 Similarly, in the resolution framework, as of the withdrawal date, the assessment of the eligibility of liabilities for the minimum requirement for own funds and eligible liabilities may be affected for those liabilities issued under UK law.26 3.
ONTRACTS  Contract continuity for relationships between parties established in the Union and in the United Kingdom will be affected by the loss of the single passport, as this will impair the ability of UK based entities to continue performing certain obligations and activities and ensure service continuity with regard to contracts concluded before the withdrawal date. As of the withdrawal date
the EU rules on conflicts of laws and jurisdictions will no longer apply to the United Kingdom. Where contracts27 are governed by the law of the United Kingdom, or contain a choice of law or an agreement in favour of the jurisdiction of a court in the United Kingdom, parties to those contracts should carefully assess the impact of the withdrawal of the United Kingdom on the validity and enforceability of those contracts and mitigate any risks, including any risks to their clients
The website of the Commission on Banking and Finance (https://ec.europa.eu/info/business-economy-euro/banking-and-finance_en) provide
for general information concerning banking and payment services. These pages will be updated with further information, where necessary.
European Commission
irectorate
eneral for Financial Stability, Financial Services and Capital Markets Union                                                  25
See Articles 107, 114, 115, 116 and 142 of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013
26
See Articles 45 and 55 of  Directive 2014/59/EU. See also Opinion of the European Banking Authority on issues related to the departure of the United Kingdom from the European Union
EBA/OP/2017/12), Part IV Resolution and deposit guarantee schemes, page 16 and ff. 27
E.g. contracts supporting issuances of eligible liabilities under Article 55 of Directive 2014/59/EU

EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL FOR FINANCIAL STABILITY, FINANCIAL SERVICES AND CAPITAL MARKETS UNION
Brussels, 8 February 2018
OTICE TO STAKEHOLDER
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND EU RULES IN THE FIELD OF INSURANCE
REINSURANCE The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. This means that
unless a ratified withdrawal agreement
establishes another date, all Union primary and secondary law will cease to apply to the United Kingdom from 30 March 2019, 00:00h (CET) ('the withdrawal date').
The United Kingdom will then become a 'third country'.
Preparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for EU and national authorities but also for private parties
In view of the considerable uncertainties, in particular concerning the content of a possible withdrawal agreement, insurance/reinsurance undertakings, policyholders and other stakeholders are reminded of certain legal repercussions which need to be considered when the United Kingdom becomes a third country. Subject to any transitional arrangement that may be contained in a possible withdrawal agreement, as of the withdrawal date, the EU rules in the field of insurance/reinsurance, (in particular the Solvency II Directive
and the Insurance Distribution Directive5) setting out the framework governing the activities of insurance/reinsurance undertakings across the EU, the protection of policyholders and the distribution of insurance products no longer apply to the United Kingdom. This has in particular the following consequences:
Negotiations are ongoing with the United Kingdom with a view to reaching a withdrawal agreement.
Furthermore, in accordance with Article 50(3) of the Treaty on European Union, the European Council, in agreement with the United Kingdom, may unanimously decide that the Treaties cease to apply at a later date.
A third country is a country not member of the EU.
Directive 2009/138/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 November 2009 on the taking-up and pursuit of the business of Insurance and Reinsurance (Solvency II), OJ L 355, 17.12.2009, p. 1
5
Directive (EU) 2016/97 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 20 January 2016 on insurance distribution (IDD), OJ L 6, 2.2.2016, p. 19

1.
UTHORISATION
UK insurance undertakings will no longer benefit from the Solvency II authorisation
to provide services in the Union (they will lose the so-called "EU passport") and will be third-country insurance undertakings. This means that those insurance undertakings will no longer be allowed to provide services in the EU, including through online sales
on the basis of their current authorisations.
Branches of UK insurance undertakings in the EU will be branches of third-country insurance undertakings. They will need an authorisation in the Member State of their activity to be able to continue to do business and have to comply with the conditions set out in Article 162 of the Solvency II Directive
The authorisation of a branch however does not grant the right to conduct business across the EU Member States, but only in the Member States that has granted the authorisation
EU-27 subsidiaries (legally independent companies established in EU-27 and controlled by or affiliated to insurance undertakings established in the United Kingdom) can continue to operate as EU insurance undertakings on the basis of their authorisation in the EU Member State of their establishment and subject to their compliance with the EU rules, including in terms of governance, risk management, and outsourcing
UK reinsurance undertakings will have to comply, for their EU business, with the conditions set by the EU Member State in which they carry out their activity. These conditions cannot be more favourable than those applying to reinsurance companies from the EU
but they may be less favourable and may well differ between EU Member States
for example
Member States are free to require the pledging of assets or the establishment of a branch by the third country reinsurer. This is without prejudice to any equivalence decision that may be adopted by the EU,10 whereby reinsurance contracts concluded with undertakings having their head office in that third country must be treated by EU Member States in the same manner as reinsurance contracts concluded with undertakings authorised in accordance with Solvency II.

Article 14 of the Solvency II Directive

Chapter 8, Sections I and II of the Solvency II Directive
8
See also the European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority (EIOPA) guidance for national competent authorities on the principles of authorisation and supervision in the context of the UK withdrawal from the European Union
https://eiopa.europa.eu/Publications/Opinions/EIOPA-BOS-17-141%20Opinion_Supervisory_Convergence.pdf

Article 174 of the Solvency II Directive
10
Article 172 of the Solvency II Directive

2.
NSURANCE CONTRACTS  Contract continuity: The loss of EU authorisation may affect the ability of UK insurance undertakings to continue performing certain obligations and activities and ensure service continuity with regard to contracts concluded before the withdrawal date.11 According to the Solvency II Directive firms are required to take measures to ensure that contracts can continue to be serviced. To this end, firms should assess the impact of the withdrawal of the United Kingdom from the European Union on their operations and contract portfolios and, also in cooperation with the relevant national supervisors, identify and mitigate risk
12 3.
THER ASPECTS  Information disclosure: According to Articles 183-186 of the Solvency II Directive and Articles 17-25 of Directive (EU) 2016/97, policyholders/customers should be informed about the impact on their rights and on the provision of insurance services that may emerge from the withdrawal of the United Kingdom from the EU, including the upcoming loss by the relevant insurance undertaking/intermediary of its EU authorisation.  Group supervision: Insurance/reinsurance undertakings operating in the EU but part of a group with the parent undertaking registered in the United Kingdom will be subject, in the absence of equivalence supervision,13 to the Solvency II provisions empowering EU supervisory authorities to require a worldwide group solvency or to apply other methods aiming to ensure appropriate group level supervision including the establishment of a holding company with head office in the Union.14 Any group-level internal model covering a UK group operating in the EU, approved by the UK Prudential Regulatory Authority before the withdrawal date will no longer be recognised in the EU as of the withdrawal date, and will require a new application and approval by an EU-27 supervisor. Any entity-level internal model for a subsidiary of an UK insurance undertaking established in one of the EU-27 Member States and approved by the supervisor of that Member State will remain valid.
11
Also considering applicable national rules. 12
See Article 41(4) and 46(2) of the Solvency II Directive.
ee also the EIOPA Opinion of 21 December 2017 on service continuity in insurance in light of the withdrawal of the United Kingdom from the European Union https://eiopa.europa.eu/Publications/Opinions/2017-12-21%20EIOPA-BoS-17-389_Opinion_on_service_continuity.pdf
13
In the absence of equivalent supervision referred to in Article 260 of the Solvency II Directive. 14
Article 262 of the Solvency II Directive

Insurance/reinsurance intermediaries registered in the United Kingdom will no longer benefit from their registration rights under Directive (EU) 2016/9715
and will therefore no longer be able to conduct business in the European Union on the basis of their UK registration
The website of the Commission on Insurance and Pensions (https://ec.europa.eu/info/business-economy-euro/banking-and-finance/insurance-and-pensions_en) provide for general information concerning insurance/reinsurance activities. These pages will be updated with further information, where necessary.
European Commission
irectorate
eneral for Financial Stability, Financial Services and Capital Markets Union                                                  15
Article
of Directive (EU) 2016/97
EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL FOR FINANCIAL STABILITY, FINANCIAL SERVICES AND CAPITAL MARKETS UNION
Brussels, 27 April 2018
OTICE TO STAKEHOLDER
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND EU RULES IN THE FIELD OF INSTITUTIONS FOR OCCUPATIONAL RETIREMENT PROVISION
The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. This means that unless a ratified withdrawal agreement
establishes another date or the period is extended by the European Council in accordance with Article 50(3) of the Treaty on European Union, all Union primary and secondary law will cease to apply to the United Kingdom from 30 March 2019, 00:00h (CET) ('the withdrawal date'). The United Kingdom will then become a 'third country'.
Preparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for EU and national authorities but also for private parties.  In view of the considerable uncertainties, in particular concerning the content of a possible withdrawal agreement, Institutions for Occupational Retirement Provision ("IORPs"), IORP members and beneficiaries, undertakings sponsoring IORPs and other stakeholders are reminded of certain legal repercussions, which need to be considered when the United Kingdom becomes a third country. Subject to any transitional arrangement that may be contained in a possible withdrawal agreement, as of the withdrawal date, the EU rules for IORPs, and in particular Directive (EU) 2016/2341 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 14 December 2016 on the activities and supervision of institutions for occupational retirement provision
no longer apply to the United Kingdom. This has in particular the following consequences:  As of the withdrawal date, IORPs registered or authorised in the United Kingdom will no longer benefit from the registration or authorisation under Directive (EU) 2016/2341
to provide services in the Union and will be treated as third-country undertakings, to which Directive (EU) 2016/2341 does not apply. This means that, as of the withdrawal date, those IORPs will no longer be allowed to operate, on the basis of their current registration/authorisation as IORPs for members or beneficiaries whose relationship with the sponsoring undertaking is governed by the social and labour law relevant to the field of occupational pension schemes of a
EU-27
Negotiations are ongoing with the United Kingdom with a view to reaching a withdrawal agreement.
A third country is a country not member of the EU
3
OJ L 354, 23.12.2016, p. 37. This Directive will repeal Directive 2003/41/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 3 June 2003 on the activities and supervision of institutions for occupational retirement provision (OJ L 235, 23.9.2003, p. 10). It will have to be applied by Member States from 13 January 2019 at the latest.
Article
9, 11 and 12 of Directive (EU) 2016/2341

Member State (hereafter "EU-27 members and beneficiaries")
The assets will be in the United Kingdom and members and beneficiaries will have to rely on UK national law to have access to their assets.
As of the withdrawal date, IORPs registered or authorised in the United Kingdom will have to comply, with regard to activities related to EU-27 members and beneficiaries, with the rules of the host Member State applicable to activities of IORPs registered or authorised in a third country. These rules may require a registration or authorisation by the relevant competent authority of the host Member State in accordance with the applicable national rules. Such registration or authorisation does, however, not grant the right to conduct business across the EU Member States, but is limited to the Member State that has granted the registration or authorisation.
Before the withdrawal date, IORPs registered or authorised in the UK which are active cross-border in the EU-27 should contact the competent authorities of the relevant host EU-27 Member States to determine whether and under which conditions they might be allowed to continue their activities pursuant to national law in this Member State. Depending on the outcome, they might have to take contingency measures:
o
f it is not possible to continue the cross-border operations into an EU-27 Member State, UK IORPs may decide to transfer their portfolio related to EU-27 members and beneficiaries to a receiving IORP registered or authorised in EU-27, in order to keep such members and beneficiaries under the EU IORP framework. Article 12 of Directive (EU) 2016/2341, which has to be transposed at the latest by 13 January 2019, provides for a transfer procedure.
If a transfer is not performed, the UK IORP will no longer be able to continue to operate the pension schemes of its EU-27 members and beneficiaries, and the consequences for its EU-27 members and beneficiaries are as described above

If the Member State allows continued cross-border activities under its national law, the IORPs would have to decide whether to rely on these rules or to transfer the portfolio.

ponsoring undertakings established in the EU-27 that pay contributions to an IORP registered or authorised in the United Kingdom should assess the conditions for the continuation of the relevant schemes on the basis of the national law of the Member State in which they are established. In any event, as of the withdrawal date
such pension schemes will no longer benefit from the legal framework provided by Directive (EU) 2016/2341. If the host Member State does not allow the continued cross-border activities of the UK IORP, sponsoring undertakings will have to make sure that the IORP in question is either transferred or that they find an alternative IORP. Sponsoring undertakings established in the United Kingdom that pay contributions to an IORP registered or authorised in the EU-27 with regard to a pension scheme for members or beneficiaries whose relationship with the sponsoring
As long as Member States have not transposed Directive (EU) 2016/2341, Directive 2003/41/EC applies. Directive 2003/41/EC does not provide for a transfer procedure. However, a transfer may be possible on the basis of an agreement between the authorities of the transferring and receiving IORPs. In this case, IORPs could therefore already initiate such a transfer.
undertaking is governed by EU-27 social and labour law will be able to continue doing so
and be subject to Directive (EU) 2016/2341.
As of the withdrawal date, members and beneficiaries whose relationship with the sponsoring undertaking of an EU-27 IORP is governed by the social and labour law of the United Kingdom relevant to the field of occupational pension schemes ("UK members and beneficiaries"
will no longer benefit from the legal framework set by Directive (EU) 2016/2341, even if the IORP is registered or authorised in the EU-27
Whether and under which regulatory framework the EU-27 IORP is allowed to provide services to members and beneficiaries in a third country has to be assessed under the national rules applicable to the IORP.
Contract continuity: The loss of EU registration/authorisation may also affect the ability of IORPs registered or authorised in the United Kingdom to continue performing certain obligations and activities and ensure service continuity with regard to contracts concluded before the withdrawal date
IORPs, undertakings sponsoring IORPs and other stakeholders should assess the impact of the withdrawal of the United Kingdom on their operations and contractual arrangements and, also in cooperation with the relevant national supervisors and with the European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority (EIOPA)
identify and mitigate compliance risks.
According to Article 37(3) of Directive (EU) 2016/2341, IORP members and beneficiaries have to receive, within a reasonable time, any relevant information regarding changes to the pension scheme rules. This includes information on the impact on their rights and the provision of IORP services emerging from the withdrawal of the United Kingdom from the EU, since the withdrawal may trigger changes to their pension scheme rules
The website of the Commission on Insurance and Pensions (https://ec.europa.eu/info/business-economy-euro/banking-and-finance/insurance-and-pensions_en) provide for general information concerning IORP activities. These pages will be updated with further information, where necessary.
European Commission
irectorate
eneral for Financial Stability, Financial Services and Capital Markets Union
Article 6(3) of Directive (EU) 2016/2341 does not specify a specific place of establishment for the sponsoring undertaking.
UK members and beneficiaries may reside in the United Kingdom or in the EU-27.
See Article 6(19) of Directive (EU) 2016/2341 on the definition of a cross-border activity.
As Directive (EU) 2016/2341 does not contain specific provisions on how to ensure that contracts can continue to be honoured, it is a matter determined by the national law of the host Member State.
EUROPEAN COMMISSION Directorate-General for Internal Market, Industry, Entrepreneurship and SMEs
Brussels, 8 February 2018
OTICE TO STAKEHOLDERS
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND EU RULES IN THE FIELD O
TYPE-APPROVAL OF MOTOR VEHICLES The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. This means that
unless a ratified withdrawal agreement
establishes another date, all Union primary and secondary law will cease to apply to the United Kingdom from 30 March 2019, 00:00h (CET) ('the withdrawal date').
The United Kingdom will then become a 'third country'.
Preparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for EU and national authorities, but also for private parties. In view of the considerable uncertainties, in particular concerning the content of a possible withdrawal agreement, all interested parties, and especially economic operators, are reminded of legal repercussions, which need to be considered when the United Kingdom becomes a third country
Subject to any transitional arrangement that may be contained in a possible withdrawal agreement, Directive 2007/46/EC
establishing a framework for the approval of motor vehicles and their trailers and of systems, components and separate technical units intended for such vehicles (hereinafter collectively referred to as "motor vehicles") will no longer appl
to the United Kingdom as of the withdrawal date. This has in particular the following consequences:
Negotiations are ongoing with the United Kingdom with a view to reaching a withdrawal agreement.
Furthermore, in accordance with Article 50(3) of the Treaty on European Union, the European Council, in agreement with the United Kingdom, may unanimously decide that the Treaties cease to apply at a later date.
A third country is a country not member of the EU.
For goods placed on the EU market before the withdrawal date, the EU is trying to agree solutions with the United Kingdom in the withdrawal agreement. The essential principles of the EU's position on goods placed on the market under Union law before the withdrawal date are available here: https://ec.europa.eu/commission/publications/position-paper-goods-placed-market-under-union-law-withdrawal-date_en
5
Directive 2007/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 5 September 2007 establishing a framework for the approval of motor vehicles and their trailers, and of systems, components and separate technical units intended for such vehicles (OJ L 263, 9.10.2007, p. 1).
2 This notice is relevant for motor vehicles placed on the EU-27 market
as from the withdrawal date.
Separate notices will be issued concerning the legal consequences of the United Kingdom's withdrawal with respect to vehicles falling within the scope of Regulation (EU) No 167/2013
(agricultural and forestry vehicles), Regulation (EU) No 168/20138  (two
or three-wheeled vehicles and quadricycles) and Regulation (EU) No 2016/1628
(non-road mobile machinery). 1.
ONSEQUENCES FOR THE IDENTIFICATION OF ECONOMIC OPERATORS Pursuant to Article 5(3) of Directive 2007/46/EC, manufacturers established outside the Union must appoint a representative established in the Union to represent them before the Member State type-approval authorities.  Manufacturers' representatives established in the United Kingdom will not, as from the withdrawal date, be considered as established in the Union for the purposes of Article 5(3). Therefore, to the extent that Directive 2007/46/EC is still relevant to their activities, manufacturers established outside the Union are advised to take the necessary steps to ensure that, as from the withdrawal date, their appointed representatives are established in the EU-27. 2.
ONSEQUENCES FOR TYPE-APPROVAL
AND TYPE-APPROVAL AUTHORITIES Motor vehicles within the scope of Directive 2007/46/EC may only be registered, sold and enter into service if they are accompanied by a valid certificate of conformity issued by the manufacturer attesting that the vehicles have been manufactured in conformity with the E
type-approval granted by a Member State authority.10
For the purposes of Directive 2007/46/EC, "approval authority" means "the authority of a Member State with competence for all aspects of the approval of a type of vehicle, system, component or separate technical unit or of the individual approval of a vehicle; for the authorisation process, for issuing and, if appropriate, withdrawing approval certificates; for acting as the contact point for the approval authorities of other Member
The concept of placing on the market refers to each individual product
not to a type of product, irrespectively of whether it was manufactured as an individual unit or in series
cf. section 2.2 of Commission Notice 2016/C 272/01 "The Blue Guide on the implementation of EU product rules 2016", OJ C 272, 26.7.2016, p. 1
hereinafter referred to as "the Blue Guide").
Regulation (EU) No 167/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 5 February 2013 on the approval and market surveillance of agricultural and forestry vehicles, OJ L 60, 2.3.2013, p. 1.
Regulation (EU) No 168/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 January 2013 on the approval and market surveillance of two
or three-wheeled vehicles and quadricycles, OJ L 60, 2.3.2013, p. 52).
Regulation (EU) 2016/1628 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 14 September 2016 on requirements relating to gaseous and particulate pollutant emission limits and type-approval for internal combustion engines for non-road mobile machinery, amending Regulations (EU) No 1024/2012 and (EU) No 167/2013, and amending and repealing Directive 97/68/EC, OJ L 252, 16.9.2016, p. 53. 10
Cf. Articles 4(3), 18 and 26 of Directive 2007/46/EC.
3 States; for designating the technical services and for ensuring that the manufacturer meets his obligations regarding the conformity of production".11 As from the withdrawal date, Directive 2007/46/EC will cease to apply to the United Kingdom. This means that, as from that date, the United Kingdom approval authority will cease to be an EU type-approval authorit
under Directive 2007/46/EC. As a result, it will not be possible as from the withdrawal date for a manufacturer to place on the Union market motor vehicles accompanied by a certificate of conformity referring to a type-approval granted by the United Kingdom approval authority formerly competent under EU law. In particular, the United Kingdom
pproval authority will no longer be in a position to perform any of the functions and activities of an approval authority for the purposes of Directive 2007/46/EC with respect to type-approvals it granted prior to the withdrawal date
Moreover, the United Kingdom approval authority will no longer be able to issue revisions or extensions to such approvals on the basis of Article 14 of Directive 2007/46/EC. With respect to type-approvals granted by the United Kingdom authority prior to the withdrawal date
the Commission is considering the necessary and appropriate steps to ensure and facilitate continued compliance with EU law.
he website of the Commission on automotive industry (https://ec.europa.eu/growth/sectors/automotive_en
provides general information concerning Union harmonisation legislation applicable to type-approval of motor vehicles
These pages will be updated with further information, where necessary.
European Commission
Directorate-General for Internal Market, Industry, Entrepreneurship and SMEs
11
Article 3, point 29, of Directive 2007/46/EC.
EUROPEAN COMMISSION Directorate-General for Internal Market, Industry, Entrepreneurship and SMEs
Brussels, 28 March 2018
OTICE TO STAKEHOLDERS
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND EU RULES IN THE FIELD O
TYPE-APPROVAL OF CERTAIN VEHICLES AND ENGINES The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. This means that
unless a ratified withdrawal agreement
establishes another date, all Union primary and secondary law will cease to apply to the United Kingdom from 30 March 2019, 00:00h (CET) ('the withdrawal date').
The United Kingdom will then become a 'third country'.
Preparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for EU and national authorities, but also for private parties. In view of the considerable uncertainties, in particular concerning the content of a possible withdrawal agreement, all interested parties, and especially economic operators, are reminded of legal repercussions, which need to be considered when the United Kingdom becomes a third country
Subject to any transitional arrangement that may be contained in a possible withdrawal agreement, Regulation (EU) No 167/2013 on the approval and market surveillance of agricultural and forestry vehicles5, Regulation (EU) No 168/2013 on the approval and market surveillance of two
or three-wheel vehicles and quadricycles6, and Regulation (EU) No 2016/1628 on requirements relating to gaseous and particulate pollutant
Negotiations are ongoing with the United Kingdom with a view to reaching a withdrawal agreement.
Furthermore, in accordance with Article 50(3) of the Treaty on European Union, the European Council, in agreement with the United Kingdom, may unanimously decide that the Treaties cease to apply at a later date.
A third country is a country not member of the EU.
For goods placed on the EU market before the withdrawal date, the EU is trying to agree solutions with the United Kingdom in the withdrawal agreement. The essential principles of the EU's position on goods placed on the market under Union law before the withdrawal date are available here: https://ec.europa.eu/commission/publications/position-paper-goods-placed-market-under-union-law-withdrawal-date_en
5
Regulation (EU) No 167/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 5 February 2013 on the approval and market surveillance of agricultural and forestry vehicles, OJ L 60, 2.3.2013, p. 1.
Regulation (EU) No 168/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 January 2013 on the approval and market surveillance of two
or three-wheel vehicles and quadricycles, OJ L 60, 2.3.2013, p. 52.
2 emission limits and type-approval for internal combustion engines for non-road mobile machinery
(hereafter "the Regulations") will no longer appl
to the United Kingdom as of the withdrawal date. This notice is relevant for vehicles and engines within the scope of the Regulations and placed on the EU-27 market
as from the withdrawal date.
A separate notice has been issued concerning the legal consequences of the United Kingdom's withdrawal with respect to vehicles falling within the scope of Directive 2007/46/EC
(motor vehicles).10 1.
ONSEQUENCES FOR THE IDENTIFICATION OF ECONOMIC OPERATORS Pursuant to Article
8
) and 8(5) of Regulation (EU) No 167/2013, Articles 9(4) and 9(5) of Regulation (EU) No 168/2013, and Articles 8(10) and 8(11) of Regulation (EU) No 2016/1628
respectively, manufacturers established outside the Union must appoint a single representative established in the Union to represent them before the Member State type-approval authorities and for the purposes of market surveillance
Manufacturers' representatives established in the United Kingdom will not, as from the withdrawal date, be considered as established in the Union for the purposes of the aforementioned Articles. Therefore, to the extent that the Regulation
are still relevant to their activities, manufacturers established outside the Union are advised to take the necessary steps to ensure that, as from the withdrawal date, their appointed representatives are established in the EU-27. 2.
ONSEQUENCES FOR TYPE-APPROVAL
AND TYPE-APPROVAL AUTHORITIES
ehicles within the scope of Regulation
(EU) No 167/2013 and (EU) No 168/2013 may only be placed on the market, registered or entered into service if they are accompanied by a valid certificate of conformity issued by the manufacturer attesting that the vehicles have been manufactured in conformity with the E
type-approval granted by a Member State authority.11

Regulation
EU) 2016/1628 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 14 September 2016 on requirements relating to gaseous and particulate pollutant emission limits and type-approval for internal combustion engines for non-road mobile machinery, amending Regulations (EU) No 1024/2012 and (EU) No 167/2013, and amending and repealing Directive 97/68/EC, OJ L 252, 16.9.2016, p.53.
The concept of placing on the market refers to each individual product and not to types of products, and whether it was manufactured as an individual unit or in series. For more information on the concept of placing on the market, see Chapter 2 of Commission Notice 2016/C 272/01 "The Blue Guide on the implementation of EU product rules 2016", OJ C 272, 26.7.2016, p. 1 (hereinafter referred to as "the Blue Guide").
Directive 2007/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 5 September 2007 establishing a framework for the approval of motor vehicles and their trailers, and of systems, components and separate technical units intended for such vehicles, OJ L 263, 9.10.2007, p. 1
10
"Notice to stakeholders
Withdrawal of the United Kingdom and EU rules in the field of type-approval of motor vehicles", published on 8.2.2018 and available here: https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness_en.  11
Cf. Articles
and
of Regulation (EU) No 167/2013 and Articles 6(2), 38 and 43 of Regulation (EU) No. 168/2013.
3
egulation
(EU) No 167/2013 and (EU) No 168/2013 define "approval authority" as "the authority of a Member State established or appointed by the Member State and notified to the Commission by the Member State with competence for all aspects of the approval of a type of vehicle, system, component or separate technical unit, for the authorisation process, for issuing and, if appropriate, withdrawing or refusing approval certificates, for acting as the contact point for the approval authorities of other Member States, for designating the technical services and for ensuring that the manufacturer meets his obligations regarding the conformity of production
12
Engines for non-road mobile machinery within the scope of Regulation (EU) No 2016/1628 or non-road mobile machinery in which such engines are installed may only be placed on the market if the engine is covered by a valid EU type-approval.13
Regulation (EU) No 2016/1628 defines "approval authority" as "the authority of a Member State established or appointed by the Member State and notified by it to the Commission and which has  competence for: (a) all aspects of the EU type-approval of an engine or of an engine family; (b) the authorisation process; (c)  granting and, where appropriate, withdrawing or refusing EU type-approval and issuing EU type-approval certificates; (d) acting as the contact point for the approval authorities of other Member States; (e ) designating the technical services; and (f) ensuring that the manufacturer meets its obligations regarding conformity of production." 14
As from the withdrawal date, the Regulation
will cease to apply to the United Kingdom. This means that, as from that date, the United Kingdom approval authority will cease to be an EU type-approval authorit
under the Regulation
As a result, it will not be possible as from the withdrawal date for a manufacturer to place on the Union market: (i) vehicles within the scope of Regulations (EU) No 167/2013 and (EU) No 168/2013 accompanied by a certificate of conformity referring to a type-approval granted by the United Kingdom approval authority formerly competent under EU law; (ii) engines for non-road mobile machinery or non-road mobile machinery in which such engines are installed for which a type-approval was granted by the United Kingdom approval authority formerly competent under EU law.
he United Kingdom
pproval authority will no longer be in a position to perform any of the functions and activities of an approval authority for the purposes of the Regulation
with respect to type-approvals it granted prior to the withdrawal date
Moreover, the United Kingdom approval authority will no longer be able to issue revisions or extensions to such approvals on the basis of Article 30 of Regulation (EU) No 167/2013, Article 35 of Regulation (EU) No 168/2013 or Article 28 of Regulation (EU) No. 2016/1628, respectively
12
See Article 3, point 27 of Regulation (EU) No 167/2013; Article 3, point 56, of Regulation (EU) No 168/2013. 13
Cf. Article 5(3) of Regulation (EU) No 2016/1628. 14
Article 3, point 55, of Regulation (EU) No 2016/1628

With respect to type-approvals granted by the United Kingdom authority prior to the withdrawal date, the Commission is considering the necessary and appropriate step
to ensure and facilitate continued compliance with EU law.
he website of the Commission on automotive industry (https://ec.europa.eu/growth/sectors/automotive_en
provides general information concerning Union harmonisation legislation applicable to type-approval of motor vehicles
These pages will be updated with further information, where necessary.
European Commission
Directorate-General for Internal Market, Industry, Entrepreneurship and SMEs
EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL FOR INTERNAL MARKET, INDUSTRY, ENTREPRENEURSHIP AND SMES
Brussels,
March 2019
UESTIONS AND ANSWERS RELATED TO THE UNITED KINGDOM'S WITHDRAWAL FROM THE EUROPEAN UNION WITH REGARD TO TYPE-APPROVAL OF VEHICLES
SYSTEMS
COMPONENTS AND SEPARATE TECHNICAL UNITS On 8 January 2019, the European Parliament and the Council of the European Union adopted Regulation (EU) 2019/261, which complements Union type-approval legislation with regard to the withdrawal of the United Kingdom from the Union.
This list of Questions and Answers (Q&A) give
further guidance on the basis of the Regulation in a situation where the United Kingdom (UK) becomes a third country on 30 March 2019 at 00:00h (CET)
the withdrawal date') without a ratified withdrawal agreement and hence
without the transition period provided for in the Withdrawal Agreement3;  and
without the provisions in relation to "goods placed on the market" provided for in the Withdrawal Agreement. The list of Q&A may be further updated and complemented as necessary and should be read in conjunction with Regulation (EU) 2019/26, the
Notice to stakeholders  withdrawal of the United Kingdom and EU rules in the field of type-approval of motor vehicles
and the
Notice to stakeholders  withdrawal of the United Kingdom and EU rules in the field of type-approval of certain vehicles and engines
, which were
OJ L 8, 10.1.2019, p. 1.
Regulation (EU) 2019/26 is adopted within the framework of Directive 2007/46/EC on the approval of motor vehicles, Regulation (EU) No 167/2013 on the approval and market surveillance of agricultural and forestry vehicles, Regulation (EU) No 168/2013 on the approval and market surveillance of  two
or three-wheel vehicles and quadricycles, Regulation (EU) 2016/1628 on requirements relating to gaseous and particulate pollutant emission limits and type-approval for internal combustion engines for non-road mobile machinery and Regulation (EC) No 765/2008 on market surveillance.
Cf. Part four of the Agreement on the withdrawal of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland from the European Union and the European Atomic Energy Community (OJ C 66 I, 19.2.2019, p. 1).
4 https://ec.europa.eu/growth/content/brexit-%E2%80%93-guidance-stakeholders-impact-type-approval-motor-vehicles_en
5 https://ec.europa.eu/growth/content/brexit-guidance-stakeholders-impact-type-approval-certain-vehicles-and-engines_en
2 published by the European Commission on 29 January 2018 and 28 March 2018
respectively. A.
CONCEPT OF GOODS PLACED ON THE UNION (EU-27) MARKET BEFORE THE WITHDRAWAL DATE In the event of the UK leaving the EU without a ratified withdrawal agreement, Union type-approval legislation will cease to apply to and in the UK on the withdrawal date. This means that, as from that date, the UK type-approval authority will cease to be a type-approval authority under Union type-approval legislation. As a result, placing on the Union (EU-27) market of products manufactured on the basis of a UK type-approval will no longer be possible as of the withdrawal date.
The relevant criterion to determine the extent to which there may be consequences from the UK withdrawal for a specific vehicle, system, component or separate technical unit manufactured on the basis of a UK type-approval is therefore whether that product was placed on the Union (EU-27) market before the withdrawal date
requirements applicable to a specific product: a product must comply with the applicable Union legislation at the time of its placing on the market6.
In this regard, Regulation (EU) 2019/26 recalls that vehicles, systems, components or separate technical units must conform to the requirements applicable at the time of their placing on the market. The concept of "placing on the market in the Union (EU-27)" must therefore be the concept used also in this framework.
lacing on the market' mean
the first supply of a product for distribution, consumption or use i
the Union (EU-27) market in the course of a commercial activity, whether in return for payment or free of charge7. Placing on the market requires an offer or agreement between two or more legal or natural persons for the transfer of ownership, possession or any other property right concerning a specific product after the stage of manufacture has taken place. The concept of placing on the market refers to each individual product, not to a type of product. Moreover, placing on the market does not require physical delivery of the product but does require that the manufacturing stage has been completed
These principles apply to the automotive sector as harmonised at EU-level as no deviating provisions are laid down in the harmonised legislation of the sector.
ehicles, complete or incomplete
shall be equipped with a valid certificate of conformity (CoC) based on a valid type-approval by the time of their placing on the EU-27 market
This means that vehicles, complete or incomplete, which were placed on the EU-27 market with a CoC based on a valid UK type-approval prior to the withdrawal

ee Commission Notice 2016/C 272/01 "The Blue Guide on the implementation of EU product rules 2016", OJ C 272, 26.7.2016, p. 1
7
See Article 2
) of Regulation (EC) No 765/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 9 July 2008 setting out the requirements for accreditation and market surveillance relating to the marketing of products and repealing Regulation (EEC) No 339/93, OJ L 218, 13.8.2008, p. 30. The market surveillance provisions included in this Regulation are applicable in the context of Directive 2007/46/EC on the approval of motor vehicles. See also Regulation
(EU) No 167/2013, (EU) No 168/2013 and (EU) 2016/1628
8
For more information on the concept of placing on the market, see Chapter 2 of "The Blue Guide on the implementation of EU product rules 2016", cited above
3 date may continue to be made available on the EU-27 market. Without prejudice to the application of the provisions on the placing on the market, registration and entry into service of end-of-series vehicles,
registration and entry into service as of the withdrawal date will be possible under the conditions set out in Regulations (EU) 2019/26 (see Section B below)
As of the withdrawal date, vehicles, systems, components or separate technical units can only be placed on the EU-27 market with a CoC based on a Union (EU-27) type-approval.  1. Vehicles, systems, components or separate technical units physically in the distribution chain or already in use
n the EU-27 market on the withdrawal date
Example
: Tyres already with an EU-27 importer or a motor vehicle already with
EU-27 dealer
These products are considered as placed on the Union (EU-27) market before the withdrawal date and can therefore continue to be made available in the EU-27 market (provided the vehicles are equipped with a valid CoC) or remain in use with no need for a (new) Union type
pproval, re-labelling/re-marking or product modifications. This is without prejudice to the obligation to appoint a new representative' established in the EU-27 where the current one is UK-based and intends to place products on the EU-27 market as of the withdrawal date
Example B: An unfinished truck manufactured in the Union (EU-27) prior to the withdrawal date, based on a UK type-approval, subject to multistage production, equipped with a valid CoC and supplied for further assembly or completion in the Union (EU-27) prior to the withdrawal date
This example concerns a multistage vehicle where the first stage comprises the chassis-cab (i.e. an incomplete vehicle).  In case of a truck, a chassis-cab may be type-approved as the first stage for a vehicle manufacturer, and a bodybuilder (i.e. third party) holds the approval for a subsequent second and final stage. A truck could also be built in multistage procedure by the same manufacturer. In case the incomplete vehicle can be considered having been placed on the EU-27 market, on the basis of a commercial transaction between two entities for the purposes of distribution or use in the EU-27 market prior to the UK withdrawal, the approach is the same as for the products under Example A.
2. Vehicles, systems, components or separate technical units manufactured either in a third country or in the Union (EU-27) on the basis of a UK type-approval, supplied to an importer/ative in the EU-27 or sold to an EU-27 dealer or customer before the withdrawal date after the manufacturing stage was completed but not yet physically delivered to the EU-27 customer until after the UK withdrawal
Example: A non-road mobile machinery engine manufactured in the US on the basis of a UK type-approval is sold to an EU-27 importer or an original equipment manufacturer of non-road mobile machinery on 28 March 2019 (i.e. date of
Article 27(3) of Directive 2007/46/EC, Article 39(3) of Regulation (EU) No 167/2013 and Article 44(3) of Regulation (EU) No 168/2013. Cf. also recitals 15 and 19 of the preamble to Regulation (EU) No 2019/26.
placing on the market, date of the transaction) but will only arrive at the Union customs on 5 June 2019.
Same as the products under No. 1. The date of placing on the Union (EU-27) market is the date of the transaction between the manufacturer and the EU-27 importer or original equipment manufacturer provided that the manufacturing stage has been completed by that date. Placing on the market does not require physical delivery of the product.
3. Vehicles, systems, components or separate technical units manufactured on the basis of a UK type-approval, either imported into the UK from a third country or manufactured in the UK before the withdrawal date
subsequently sold to an EU-27 customer as of the withdrawal date.
Example
An incomplete vehicle manufactured in Japan based on
UK type-approval and accompanied by a CoC is sold to a UK bodybuilder on 25 February 2019 and imported by the latter into the UK on 10 March 2019. The UK bodybuilder then sells it to a
EU-27 dealer on 20 April 2019 and the complete vehicle arrives at the Union customs on 30 April 2019.
In this example, the incomplete vehicle is placed on the Union (EU-27) market after the withdrawal date as the date of its first making available to an EU-27 customer is on or after the withdrawal date. The incomplete vehicle is considered as a product imported from a third country and will have to fully comply with the provisions of Union law applicable at the time of its placing on the market.
Products placed on the EU-27 market as of the withdrawal date need to be accompanied by a CoC referring to
type-approval issued by an EU-27 type-approval authority
4. Vehicles, systems, components or separate technical units manufactured in a third country on the basis of a UK type-approval after the withdrawal date.
Example:
car manufactured in China based on
UK type-approval on 5 April 2019 is sold to an EU-27 dealer on 15 April 2019 and arrives at the Union customs on 1 June 2019.
In this example, the car cannot be placed on the Union (EU-27) market based on a CoC referring to the UK type-approval. Same as in the situation under No. 3
5. How can proof of placing on the market before the withdrawal date be given? Proof of placing on the market can be given on the basis of any relevant document ordinarily used in business transactions (e.g. contract of sale concerning goods which have already been manufactured, invoice, documents concerning the shipping of goods to distribution or similar commercial documents). In practice, such proof will need to be given in case of checks upon importation into the Union (EU-27) or in case of checks by market surveillance authorities or at the time of registration, for products subject to that requirement
The documentary evidence provided must make it possible to verify that it corresponds to the individual goods and quantity presented to customs or checked by market surveillance
authorities or for which registration is requested, for example, with the reference to the specific identification element
of the products. B.
RANTING OF UNION TYPE-APPROVALS IN ACCORDANCE WITH REGULATION (EU) 2019/26
Article 4 of Regulation (EU) 2019/26 provides that a manufacturer holding a valid UK type-approval may, until the Union type-approval legislation ceases to apply to and in the United Kingdom, submit an application to a Union (EU-27) type-approval authority for a Union type-approval of the same type.
1. New Union type-approval granted and taking effect before the withdrawal date
Under this scenario, the old UK type-approval will become invalid as of the date
n which the new Union type-approval takes effect.
Article 5
), third subparagraph, of Regulation (EU) 2019/26 provides that vehicles, systems, components or separate technical units produced on the basis of a UK type-approval which has become invalid as a result of the granting of a Union type-approval before the withdrawal date may be placed on the market, registered and entered into service in the Union until Union type-approval legislation ceases to apply to and in the United Kingdom. Where the UK type-approval becomes invalid before that date for other reasons
the vehicles, systems, components or separate technical units can only be placed on the market, registered and entered into service in the Union until the date on which the Union type-approval becomes invalid. For vehicles, manufacturers will have to indicate the new Union type-approval number in a supplement to the CoC
Recital 17 in the preamble to Regulation (EU) 2019/26 clarifies that, of placing on the market, of registration, and of entry into service can differ, the moment when the first of those steps has been undertaken should be used to determine the time limits set out in this Regulationtechnical unit placed on the market before the withdrawal date under the conditions set out in Article 5(6), third subparagraph, may be registered and entered into service also on or after the withdrawal date.

New Union type-approval granted on or after the withdrawal date
It is foreseeable that a Union type-approval authority, despite all good intentions, may not be able to process all the applications of different manufactures on time, i.e. prior to the withdrawal date. It is therefore possible that the new Union type-approval
replacing the previous UK type-approval
will be issued only on or after the withdrawal date.
In such a case

Vehicles, systems, components or separate technical units produced on the basis of a UK type-approval for which a Union type-approval for the same type has been requested in accordance with Article 4(1) of Regulation (EU) 2019/26 and which have been placed on the EU-27 market before the withdrawal date may be registered and enter into service also on or after the withdrawal date, pending the granting of the new Union type-approval. For vehicles, manufacturers will have to present proof to the competent authorities of the Member State where registration and entry into service is sought that
they have submitted an application to a Union type-approval authority for a Union type-approval of the same type in accordance with Article 4(1) of Regulation (EU) 2019/26.

As of the withdrawal date, production of vehicles, systems, components or separate technical units intended to be placed on the EU-27 market can only take place on the basis of a type-approval granted by an EU-27 type-approval authority.
C.
LARIFICATION ON THE (IN)VALIDITY OF TYPE-APPROVALS ISSUED UNDER DIRECTIVE 97/68/EC
Both Recital 20 and Article 7 of Regulation (EU) 2019/26 are based on the assumption that the type-approvals, which fall under the exemptions and transitional provisions provided in either Directive 97/68/EC or Regulation (EU) 2016/1628, have become invalid.  Directive 97/68/EC does not contain an Article equivalent to Article 30 of Regulation (EU) 2016/1628 that specifies when type-approvals become invalid.
However, Article 10(2) of Directive 97/68/EC contained an end-of-series provision that relie
upon the principle that a type-approval issued for an engine category of a given emission stage becomes invalid from the date of mandatory application, for the purposes of the placing on the market, of the subsequent emission stage in Article 9(4) of that Directive
Therefore, type-approvals granted under Directive 97/68/EC are considered to become invalid through the mandatory application of new emission requirements for the placing on the market. This is in line with the provisions of Article 7 of Regulation (EU) 2019/26
* * *

EUROPEAN COMMISSION

Directorate-General for Internal Market, Industry,


Entrepreneurship and SMEs
Brussels, 22 January 2018 (rev)
OTICE TO STAKEHOLDERS
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND EU RULES FOR TRADEMARKS AND COMMUNITY DESIGNS PURSUANT TO REGULATION (EU
2017/1001 ON THE EUROPEAN UNION TRADE MARK AND REGULATION (EC
NO 6/2002 ON COMMUNITY DESIGNS
The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. This means that, unless a ratified withdrawal agreement
establishes another date, all Union primary and secondary law will cease to apply to the United Kingdom from 30 March 2019, 00:00h (CET) ('the withdrawal date').
The United Kingdom will then become a 'third country'.
Preparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for EU and national authorities but also for private parties.  Subject to any transitional arrangement that may be contained in a possible withdrawal agreement, as of the withdrawal date, EU rules on EU trade marks and Community designs will no longer apply to the United Kingdom.  As a result, EU trade marks and registered Community designs registered in accordance with Union law
Regulation (EU) 2017/1001 on the European Union trade mark
and Regulation (EC) No 6/2002 on the Community designs5) as well as unregistered Community designs made available to the public in the manner provided for in Union law
Regulation (EC) No 6/2002) before the withdrawal date will continue to be valid in the EU27 Member States but will have no longer effect in the United Kingdom as from the withdrawal dat
Any application for an EU trade mark or for a registered
Negotiations are ongoing with the United Kingdom with a view to reaching a withdrawal agreement.
Furthermore, in accordance with Article 50(3) of the Treaty on European Union, the European Council, in agreement with the United Kingdom, may unanimously decide that the Treaties cease to apply at a later date.
A third country is a country not member of the EU.
Regulation (EU) 2017/1001 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 14 June 2017 on the European Union trade mark, OJ L 154, 16.6.2017, p. 1
5
Council Regulation (EC) No 6/2002 of 12 December 2001 on Community designs, OJ L 3, 5.1.2002, p. 1

Community design pending before the withdrawal date will no longer cover the United Kingdom as from that date
Any right granted by the European Union Intellectual Property Office on or after the withdrawal date will only cover the EU27 Member States. All existing seniority claims in EU trade marks based on national trade mark rights in the United Kingdom will cease to have an effect in the EU as from the withdrawal date.
In addition, the holders of international registrations of trade marks and designs having designated the European Union before the withdrawal date pursuant to the Madrid system for the international registration of marks and the Hague system for the international deposit of industrial designs, should consider that, as from that date, those international registrations will continue to be valid in the EU27 Member States only and thus will no longer have effect in the United Kingdom. In this regard, holders of a
uropean Union (EU) trade mark pursuant to Union law or of a registered Community design or of an unregistered Community Design pursuant to Union law, all applicants for an EU trade mark or for a registered Community design or any business operator who can potentially rely on such Regulations (hereinafter referred to as 'right-holders and applicants') are reminded that preparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for European and national authorities, but also for private parties. In view of the considerable uncertainties, in particular concerning the content of a possible withdrawal agreement, all right-holders and applicants are reminded of certain legal repercussions stemming from currently applicable rules of Union law when the United Kingdom becomes a third country, and which need to be considered and anticipated.
In particular, the following should be considered by right-holders and applicants:
Natural or legal persons that are domiciled or have a seat in the United Kingdom only will have to be represented before the European Union Intellectual Property Office in accordance with Article 120(1) of Regulation (EU) 2017/1001 (on the European Union trade mark) and Article 78(1) of the Regulation (EC) No 6/2002 (on Community designs) in all proceedings provided for in those two Regulations, other than the filing of an application for an EU trade mark or an application for a registered Community design

European Commission Directorate-General for Internal Market, Industry, Entrepreneurship and SME
European Union Intellectual Property Office


he EU is trying to agree solutions for some of the issues that might arise. The essential principles of the EU's position on intellectual property rights (including geographical indications) is available here:   https://ec.europa.eu/commission/publications/position-paper-intellectual-property-rights-including-geographical-indications_en
Commission européenne/Europese Commissie, 1049 Bruxelles/Brussel, BELGIQUE/BELGIË
Tel. +32 22991111
EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL FOR INTERNAL MARKET, INDUSTRY, ENTREPRENEURSHIP AND SME
Brussels, 22 January 2018 Rev1
OTICE TO STAKEHOLDERS
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND EU RULES IN THE FIELD OF INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTS
The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. This means that
unless a ratified withdrawal agreement
establishes another date, all Union primary and secondary law will cease to apply to the United Kingdom from 30 March 2019, 00:00h (CET) ('the withdrawal date').
The United Kingdom will then become a 'third country'.
Preparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for EU and national authorities but also for private parties. In view of the considerable uncertainties, in particular concerning the content of a possible withdrawal agreement, all interested parties, and especially economic operators, are reminded of legal repercussions, which need to be considered when the United Kingdom becomes a third country
Subject to any transitional arrangement that may be contained in a possible withdrawal agreement, as of the withdrawal date, the EU rules in the field of non-food and non-agricultural products, whether for use by consumers or professionals (hereinafter referred to as "Union product legislation")
no longer apply to the United Kingdom. This has
in
See the annex for the detailed list of Union product legislation.
Negotiations are ongoing with the United Kingdom with a view to reaching a withdrawal agreement.
Furthermore, in accordance with Article 50(3) of the Treaty on European Union, the European Council, in agreement with the United Kingdom, may unanimously decide that the Treaties cease to apply at a later date.
A third country is a country not member of the EU.
For goods placed on the EU market before the withdrawal date, the EU is trying to agree solutions with the United Kingdom in the withdrawal agreement. The essential principles of the EU's position on goods placed on the market under Union law before the withdrawal date are available here: https://ec.europa.eu/commission/publications/position-paper-goods-placed-market-under-union-la
withdrawal-date_en
2 particular
the consequences presented below for products placed on the EU-27 market
as from the withdrawal date
An indicative list of Union product legislation to which this notice applies can be found in the annex.
This notice should be read in conjunction with any complementary, more specific notices on the legal consequences of the United Kingdom's withdrawal that may be published with regard to any of the Union acts listed in the annex. 1.
ONSEQUENCES FOR THE IDENTIFICATION OF ECONOMIC OPERATOR
According to Union product legislation, the importer is the economic operator
established in the Union wh
places a product from a third country on the Union market. As from the withdrawal date, a manufacturer or importer established in the United Kingdom will no longer be considered as an economic operator established in the Union. As a consequence, an economic operator established in the EU-27 who, prior to the withdrawal date, was considered as an EU distributor will become an importer for the purposes of Union product legislation in relation to products from a third country that this economic operator place
on the EU-27 market as from the withdrawal date. This operator will have to comply with the specific obligations relevant to an importer, which are different from those

distributor.10
Currently
Union product legislation does not generally oblige the manufacturer to designate an authorised representative.11 However, if the manufacturer choose
to do so, the applicable legislation requires the authorised representative to be established in the Union. In addition,
pecific Union legislation does provide for the obligation to have
The concept of placing on the market refers to each individual product and not to types of products, and whether it was manufactured as an individual unit or in series. For more information on the concept of placing on the market, see Chapter 2 of Commission Notice 2016/C 272/01 "The Blue Guide on the implementation of EU product rules 2016", OJ C 272, 26.7.2016, p. 1 (hereinafter referred to as "the Blue Guide")
7
This note does not deal with the placing on the UK market as from the withdrawal date.
Several elements are commonly present in the different pieces of EU product legislation, regardless of the harmonisation technique adopted by the legislator (e.g. the notion of placing on the market and making available of a product; the definitions of the economic operators). In addition to such common elements, Union legislation based on the so-called New Approach also shares the same approach to technical harmonisation, by setting out common requirements ("essential requirements", expressed in the form of performance requirements or objectives to be attained) on how a product has to be designed and manufactured to meet the required level of e.g. health, safety or environmental protection as well as the conformity assessment procedure, which is chosen from among a common set of modules, that has to be followed to demonstrate compliance with such requirements. For more information in this regard, please see the Blue Guide
9
Union product legislation defines as economic operators the manufacturer, the importer, the distributor and the authorised representative. 10
See Chapter 3 of the Blue Guide
11
The Commission proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council laying down rules and procedures for compliance with and enforcement of Union harmonisation legislation on products (COM (2017) 795 final of 19.12.2017: https://ec.europa.eu/docsroom/documents/26976
provides for the obligation to have a person responsible for compliance information established in the Union in respect of all products that are subject to the Union harmonisation legislation set out in the Annex to the proposed Regulation.
an authorised representative (e.g. Union legislation on medical devices12
transportable pressure equipment13 or marine equipment14) or a responsible person (cosmetic products15) established in the Union. Authorised representatives or responsible persons established in the United Kingdom will not, as from the withdrawal date, be recognised as authorised representatives or responsible persons for the purposes of the applicable Union product legislation. Therefore, manufacturers are advised to take the necessary steps to ensure that
as from the withdrawal date, their designated authorised representatives or responsible persons are established in the EU-27. 2.
ONSEQUENCES FOR CONFORMITY ASSESSMENT PROCEDURES AND NOTIFIED BODIES In some product areas, Union legislation requires the intervention of a qualified third party, known as Notified Body, in the conformity assessment procedure.  Union product legislation requires Notified Bodies to be established in a Member State and be designated by a Member State notifying authority for performing the conformity assessment tasks set out in the relevant act of Union product legislation. Therefore, as from the withdrawal date, UK Notified Bodies will lose their status as EU Notified Bodies and will be removed from the Commission's information system on notified organisations (NANDO database16
As such, UK bodies will not be in a position to perform conformity assessment tasks pursuant to Union product legislation as from the withdrawal date.
hen the applicable conformity assessment procedure requires or provides for the possibility of third party intervention, a certificate delivered by
body recognised as an EU Notified Body at the time of the placing of that product on the market will be required for products placed on the market as from the withdrawal date.  Economic operators are advised to take the necessary steps to ensure that, where the applicable conformity assessment procedures require the intervention of a Notified Body, they will hold certificates issued by a
EU-27 Notified Body to demonstrate compliance for their products placed on the market as from the withdrawal date
12
Article 14 of Council Directive 93/42/EEC concerning medical devices
OJ L 169, 12.7.1993, p.1, Article 10a of Council Directive 90/385/EEC concerning active implantable medical devices, OJ L 189, 20.7.1990, p. 17 (both Directives to be replaced as of 26 May 2020 by Regulation (EU) 2017/745 of the European Parliament and of the Council, OJ L 117, 5.5.2017, p. 1, where the corresponding provision is Article 11) and Article 10 of European Parliament and Council Directive 98/79/EC on in vitro diagnostic medical devices, OJ L 331, 7.12.1998, p. 1 (to be replaced as of 26 May 202
by Regulation (EU) 2017/746 of the European Parliament and of the Council, where the corresponding provision is Article 11, OJ L 117, 5.5.2017, p. 176
13
Article 5 of Directive 2010/35/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 June 2010 on transportable pressure equipment and repealing Council Directives 76/767/EEC, 84/525/EEC, 84/526/EEC, 84/527/EEC and 1999/36/EC, OJ L 165, 30.6.2010, p. 1. 14
Article 13 of Directive 2014/90/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council on marine equipment, OJ L 257, 28.8.2014, p. 146
15 Articles 4 and 5 of Regulation (EC) No 1223/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 30 November 2009 on cosmetic products, OJ L 342, 22.12.2009, p. 59.  16
http://ec.europa.eu/growth/tools-databases/nando/
4 Where economic operators hold certificates issued by a UK Notified Body prior to the withdrawal date and plan to continue placing the product concerned on the EU-27 market as from the withdrawal date, they are advised to consider either applying for a new certificate issued by a
EU-27 Notified Body or arranging for a transfer  on the basis of a contractual arrangement between the manufacturer, the UK Notified Body, and the EU-27 Notified Body
of the file and the corresponding certificate from the UK Notified Body to a
EU-27 Notified Body
which would then take over the responsibility for that certificate
This responsibility depends on the specific conformity assessment procedure required for the product concerned under the applicable product legislation set out in Annex
The website
of the Commission on the Single Market for Goods (http://ec.europa.eu/growth/single-market/goods_en and http://ec.europa.eu/growth/sectors_en
provide general information concerning Union harmonisation legislation applicable to non-food and non-agricultural products. These pages will be updated with further information, where necessary.
European Commission
irectorate
eneral for Internal Market, Industry, Entrepreneurship and SMEs

Annex: Indicative list of Union product legislation This notice applies primarily to

roducts within the scope of Directive 2001/95/EC on general product safety (OJ L 11, 15.1.2002, p. 4)  The restriction of the use of certain hazardous substances in electrical and electronic equipment (Directive 2011/65/EU
OJ L 174, 1.7.2011, p. 88
and Directive 2012/19/EU on waste electrical and electronic equipment (OJ L 197, 24.7.2012, p. 38)  Batteries and waste batteries (Directive 2006/66/EC, OJ L 266, 26.9.2006, p. 1)  Appliances burning gaseous fuels (Directive 2009/142/EC, OJ L 330, 16.12.2009, p. 10, to be replaced as of 21 April 2018 by Regulation (EU) 2016/426, OJ L 81, 31.3.2016, p. 99
Ecodesign requirements for energy-related products (Directive 2009/125/EC, OJ L 285, 31.10.2009, p. 10
and all implementing Regulations for specific product groups that have been adopted under this Framework Directive
Simple pressure vessels (Directive 2014/29/EU
OJ L 96, 29.3.2014, p. 45
, OJ L 170, 30.6.2009, p. 1
Electrical equipment designed for use within certain voltage limits (Directive 2014/35/EU
OJ L 96, 29.3.2014, p. 357
Machinery (Directive 2006/42/EC
OJ L 157, 9.6.2006, p. 24
Electromagnetic compatibility (Directive 2014/30/EU
OJ L 96, 29.3.2014, p. 79
Measuring instruments (Directive 2014/32/EU
OJ L 96, 29.3.2014, p. 149
Non-automatic weighing instruments (Directive 2014/31/EU
OJ L 96, 29.3.2014, p. 107
Cableway installations designed to carry persons (Directive 2000/9/EC, OJ L 106, 3.5.2000, p. 21, to be replaced as of 21 April 2018 by Regulation (EU) 2016/424
OJ L 81, 31.3.2016, p. 1
Radio equipment (Directive 2014/53/EU
OJ L 153, 22.5.2014, p. 62
Medical devices and Active implantable medical devices
Directive
93/42/EEC, OJ L 169, 12.7.1993, p. 1, and 90/385/EEC, OJ L 189, 20.7.1990, p. 17, to be replaced as of 26 May 2020 by Regulation (EU) 2017/745
OJ L 117, 5.5.2017, p. 1, with the exception of the provisions of Directives 93/42/EEC and 90/385/EEC listed in Article 122 of Regulation 2017/45, for which a later date of repeal is provided for
In vitro diagnostic medical devices (Directive 98/79/EC, OJ L 331, 7.12.1998, to be replaced as of 26 May 202
by Regulation (EU) 2017/746
OJ L 117, 5.5.2017,
p. 176, with the exception of the provisions of Directive 98/79/EC listed in Article 112 of Regulation 2017/46, for which a later date of repeal is provided for
Cosmetics (Regulation (EC) 1223/2009
OJ L 342, 22.12.2009, p. 59
Pressure equipment (Directive 2014/68/EU
OJ L 189, 27.6.2014, p. 164
Transportable Pressure equipment (Directive 2010/35/EU
OJ L 165, 30.6.2010, p.
Aerosol Dispensers (Directive 75/324/EEC
OJ L 147, 9.6.1975, p. 40
Lifts and safety components for lifts
Directive 2014/33/EU
OJ L 96, 29.3.2014, p. 251
Recreational craft and personal watercraft (Directive 2013/53/EU OJ L 354, 28.12.2013, p. 90
Equipment and protective systems intended for use in potentially explosive atmospheres (Directive 2014/34/EU
OJ L 96, 29.3.2014, p. 309
Explosives for civil uses (Directive 2014/28/EU
OJ L 96, 29.3.2014, p. 1
Construction products (Regulation (EU) No 305/2011
OJ L 88, 4.4.2011, p. 5
Pyrotechnics (Directive 2013/29/EU
OJ L 178, 28.6.2013, p. 27
Regulation on the Labelling of Tyres (Regulation (EC) No 1222/2009
OJ L 342, 22.12.2009, p. 46
Personal protective equipment (Directive 89/686/EEC, OJ L 399, 30.12.1989, p. 18, to be replaced as of 21 April 2018 by Regulation (EU) 2016/425
OJ L 81, 31.3.2016, p. 51
Marine equipment (Directive 2014/90/EU
OJ L 257, 28.8.2014, p. 146
Noise emission in the environment by equipment for use outdoors (Directive 2000/14/EC
OJ L 162, 3.7.2000, p. 1
Energy labelling (Regulation (EU) No 2017/1369, OJ L 198, 28.7.2017, p. 1, and all delegated Regulations for specific product groups that have been adopted under this Framework Regulation and those adopted under Directive 2010/30/EU, OJ L 153, 18.6.2010, p. 1, the predecessor of Regulation 2017/1369
Regulation on textile fibre names and related labelling and marking of textile products (Regulation (EU) No 1007/2011
OJ L 272, 18.10.2011, p. 1
Directive relating to labelling of the materials used in the main components of footwear (Directive 94/11/EC
OJ L 100, 19.4.1994, p. 37
Metrology
(Directive 2011/17/EU OJ L 71, 18.3.2011, p. 1
Repeal of several directives  transition till 2025
Bottles as measuring containers (Directive 75/107/EEC
OJ L 42, 15.2.1975, p. 14
7  Making up of pre-packaged products (Directive 76/211/EEC
OJ L 46, 21.2.1976, p. 1
Hot-water boilers fired with liquid or gaseous fuels (Directive 92/42/EEC
OJ L 167, 22.6.1992, p. 17. The Directive was repealed by Commission Regulation (EU) No 813/2013 (OJ L 239, 6.9.2013, p. 136) implementing Directive 2009/125/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council with regard to ecodesign requirements for space heaters and combination heaters, except for Articles 7(2) and 8 thereof and Annexes III to V thereto)
Interoperability of the rail system within the European Union (Directive 2008/57/EC
OJ L 191, 18.7.2008, p. 1, to be replaced as of 16 June 2020 by Directive (EU) 2016/797
OJ L 138, 26.5.2016, p. 44
Interoperability of Electronic Road Toll Systems  (Decision 2009/750/EC implementing Directive 2004/52/EC
OJ L 268, 13.10.2009, p. 11

achographs in road transport (Regulation (EU) No 165/2014, OJ L 60, 28.2.2014, p. 1)  Interoperability of the European Air Traffic Management network  (Regulation (EC) No 552/2004
OJ L 96, 31.3.2004, p. 26

EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL FOR INTERNAL MARKET, INDUSTRY, ENTREPRENEURSHIP AND SMES
Brussels, 1 February 2019
UESTIONS AND ANSWERS RELATED TO THE UNITED KINGDOM'S WITHDRAWAL FROM THE EUROPEAN UNION WITH REGARD TO
NDUSTRIAL PRODUCTS On 22 January 2018, the European Commission services published a "Notice to stakeholders  withdrawal of the United Kingdom and EU rules in the field of industrial products
('the Notice').
An indicative list of Union product legislation to which the
tice applies can be found in its Annex
This list of Questions and Answers (Q&A) give
further guidance on the basis of the Notice in a situation where the United Kingdom (UK) becomes a third country on 30 March 2019 at 00:00h (CET)
the withdrawal date') without a ratified withdrawal agreement and hence
without the transition period provided for in the draft Withdrawal Agreement; and
without the provisions in relation to "goods placed on the market" provided for in the draft Withdrawal Agreement. The list of Q&A may be further updated and complemented as necessary and should be read in conjunction with any complementary, more specific notices or Q&A on the legal consequences of the UK's withdrawal that have been or may be published with regard to any of the Union acts listed in the Annex to the Notice. A.
CONCEPT OF GOODS PLACED ON THE UNION (EU-27) MARKET BEFORE THE WITHDRAWAL DATE The relevant criterion to determine the extent to which there may be consequences from the UK withdrawal for a specific product covered by the Notice is whether a product was placed on the Union (EU-27) market before the withdrawal date
The concept of placing on the market refers to each individual product, not to a type of products, whether it was manufactured as an individual unit or in series.
It relates to the first making available on the Union (EU-27) market, i.e. the first supply of a good for distribution, consumption or use after the manufacturing stage. Placing on the market
https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/file_import/industrial_products_en_1.pdf
does not require physical delivery of the product but does require that the manufacturing stage has been completed
1. Goods physically in the distribution chain or already in use
n the EU-27 market on the withdrawal date
Example: a cosmetic product held in the EU-27 by a wholesaler with a view to onward distribution or already on the shelf of a department store
an X-ray machine (medical device) certified by a UK Notified Body held in the EU-27 by a wholesaler or already supplied to a hospital in the EU-27, where it is in use
These goods are considered as placed on the Union (EU-27) market before the withdrawal date and can therefore continue to be made available in the EU-27 market or remain in use with no need for re-certification, re-labelling or product modifications. This is without prejudice to the obligation to appoint a new 'responsible person
established in the EU-27 where the current one is UK-based as set out under Section B below.
2. Goods manufactured either in the EU or in a third country, sold to an EU-27 customer before the withdrawal date after the manufacturing stage was completed but not yet physically delivered to the EU-27 customer on that date.
Example: an X-ray machine manufactured in the US and certified by a UK Notified Body has been sold to a Dutch hospital on 15 March 2019 (=date of placing on the market, i.e. date of the transaction) but will only arrive at Dutch customs on 5 April 2019.
Same as the goods under Q&A No. 1. The date of placing on the Union (EU-27) market is the date of the transaction between the manufacturer and the EU-27 customer after the manufacturing stage was completed. Placing on the market does not require physical delivery of the product.
3. Goods imported into the UK from a third country or manufactured in the UK
subsequently sold to an EU-27 customer before the withdrawal date but physically delivered to the EU-27 customer as of that date
Example A: an X-ray machine manufactured in the US and certified by a UK Notified Body is sold to a UK wholesaler on 15 February 2019 and imported by the latter into the UK on 15 March 2019. The UK wholesaler then sells it to a Dutch hospital on 25 March 2019 and the X-ray machine arrives at Dutch customs on 5 April 2019.
Example B: an X
ay machine manufactured in the UK and certified by a UK Notified Body is sold either directly to the Dutch hospital or via a UK
For more information on the concept of placing on the market, see Chapter 2 of Commission Notice 2016/C 272/01 "The Blue Guide on the implementation of EU product rules 2016", OJ C 272, 26.7.2016, p. 1
3 distributor, in both cases the date of the transaction with the Dutch hospital is 25 March 2019, arrival at Dutch Customs on 5 April 2019
In both examples, same as the goods under Q&A No. 1 and 2. The date of placing on the Union (EU-27) market is the date of the transaction between the UK economic operator (manufacturer, importer or distributor) to the EU-27 customer. Placing on the market does not require physical delivery of the product.
4. Goods imported into the UK from a third country or manufactured in the UK before the withdrawal date
subsequently sold to an EU-27 customer as of the withdrawal date.
Example A:
circular saw
machinery) manufactured in the US and certified by a UK Notified Body is sold to a UK wholesaler on 15 February 2019 and imported by the latter into the UK on 15 March 2019. The UK wholesaler then sells it to a Dutch factory on 5 April 2019 and the circular saw arrives at Dutch customs on 15 April 2019.
Example B: a circular saw manufactured in the UK and certified by a UK NB is sold either directly to the Dutch factory or via a UK wholesaler, in both cases the date of the transaction with the Dutch factory is 5 April 2019, arrival at Dutch Customs on 15 April 2019.
In both examples, the goods are placed on the Union (EU-27) market after the withdrawal date as the date of their first making available to an EU-27 customer is on or after the withdrawal date. The goods are considered as imports from a third country and will have to fully comply with the provisions of Union law applicable at the time of their placing on the market. This means in particular that the goods will have to have been certified by an EU-27 Notified Body, where a third-party intervention in their conformity assessment is required. Where applicable, they will also have to indicate the details of the EU-27 importer and of an EU-27 'responsible person
3
5. How can proof of placing on the market before the withdrawal date be given? Proof of placing on the market can be given on the basis of any relevant document ordinarily used in business transactions (e.g. contract of sale concerning goods which have already been manufactured, invoice, documents concerning the shipping of goods to distribution or similar commercial documents). In practice, such proof will need to be given in case of checks upon importation into the Union (EU-27) or in case of checks by market surveillance authorities. The documentary evidence provided must make it possible to verify that it corresponds to the individual goods and quantity presented to customs or checked
Please note that, in addition, the EU rules for imports set out in the Union Customs Code, as well as in the EU VAT legislation apply. For more information, please refer to the applicable "Preparedness notices" published here: https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness/preparedness-notices_en#tradetaxud
4 by market surveillance authorities, for example, with the reference to the specific identification element of the goods. B.
ESPONSIBLE PERSONS
In some product areas, Union product legislation foresees 'responsible persons
who have specific tasks in relation to ensuring continued regulatory compliance and interfacing with market surveillance authorities. These 'responsible persons' must be established in the Union, for example: the responsible person for cosmetic products;
or authorised representatives, whose appointment by the manufacturer is generally voluntary but mandatory in
few sectors, notably: medical devices, transportable pressure equipment, marine equipment
UK-based responsible persons will lose their status as from the withdrawal date, regardless of when products were placed on the market.  Therefore, manufacturers need to ensure that, as from the withdrawal date, their designated responsible persons are established in the EU-27.
Where sector-specific databases exist (e.g. the Cosmetic Registration Portal, Eudamed for medical devices), the information on responsible persons is recorded in those databases and any change will therefore be traceable there.
1. Goods placed on the Union (EU-27) market before the withdrawal date
o need for relabelling with the contact details of the new EU-27 responsible persons. The information available in the existing databases or, absent those, information provided by economic operators to the competent national authorities concerning the appointment of a new EU-27 based responsible person shall suffice. 2. Goods placed on the EU-27 market as of the withdrawal date, whether coming from the UK or another third country These goods will have to fully comply with the provisions of Union law applicable at the time of their placing on the market. This means, inter alia, that when required they will have to indicate the details of an EU-27 'responsible person
C.
MPORTERS
According to Union product legislation, the importer is the economic operator established in the Union who places a product from a third country on the Union market. As from the withdrawal date, a manufacturer or importer established in the United Kingdom will no longer be considered as an economic operator established in the Union. Union legislation generally requires the contact details of the importer to be provided on the product itself or its label.
1. Products which were imported into the EU-28 via the UK and placed on the Union (EU-27) market before the withdrawal date

Regarding the EU rules for cosmetic products, see also the "Notice to stakeholders  withdrawal of the United Kingdom and EU rules in the field of cosmetic products" (https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/cosmetic_products_en_0.pdf).
Q&A No. 1 of Section A applies. No change to the labels is required.
2. Goods imported into the UK market before the withdrawal date and made available to the EU-27 market as of that date. For products entering the EU-27 market as from the withdrawal date in respect of which the EU-28 importer
used to be UK-based, EU-27 economic operators which were previously mere distributors of those products will become importers for the purposes of Union law when making those products available in the EU-27 market for the first time (i.e. placing them on the EU-27 market). This will require them to meet more stringent obligations as regards in particular verification of product compliance and, where applicable, the indication of their contact details on the product
Regarding the labelling of the importer, Q&A No. 4 of Section A applies: these goods are placed on the Union (EU-27) market after the withdrawal date and, will need to be relabelled with the indication of the EU-27 importer.  D.
RANSFER OF NOTIFIED BODY CERTIFICATES
In some product areas, Union product legislation requires the intervention of a qualified third party, known as Notified Body, in the conformity assessment procedure. Notified Bodies must be established in a Member State and designated by a Member State notifying authority for performing the conformity assessment tasks set out in the relevant act of Union product legislation.  The Notice recalls that for the purposes of placing products on the EU-27 market as of the withdrawal date a certificate of an EU-27 Notified Body will be required. It will therefore be necessary for economic operators to either apply for a new certificate with another EU-27 Notified Body, or arrange for a transfer of the file and the corresponding certificate to an EU-27 Notified Body, which would then take over the responsibility for that certificate. The transfer of certificates from a UK Notified Body to an EU-27 Notified Body needs to take place before the withdrawal date, on the basis of a contractual arrangement between the manufacturer, the UK Notified Body, and the EU-27 Notified Body.
1. I am a manufacturer of a product for which the certificate has been transferred from a UK Notified Body to an EU-27 Notified Body. Do the EU Declaration of Conformity and the actual Notified Body Certificate need to be updated to document this change?
Yes, for products placed on the EU-27 market after the withdrawal date both the EU Declaration of Conformity (drawn up by the manufacturer) and the Notified Body Certificate must be updated accordingly: these documents will need to mention that the certificate is now under the responsibility of an EU-27 Notified Body and indicate both the old UK and the new EU-27 Notified Body's details / identification numbers.
2. Does the Notified Body number on the product itself need to be changed also for products already on the market or manufactured before the transfer of the certificates occurred?
6
f the above mentioned product documentation is in order, no need to change the Notified Body number for products already placed on the EU-27 market or manufactured before the transfer of certificate has taken place and not yet placed on the EU-27 market. However, products manufactured after the transfer of the certificate has taken place should be marked with the new EU-27 Notified Body number and it will not be possible to continue to use the UK Notified Body number until the end of the validity of the original certificate issued by it
E.
ACCREDITATION
Accreditation is an attestation issued by a national accreditation body that a conformity assessment body meets the applicable requirements to carry out a specific conformity assessment activity. Accreditation is the preferred means of demonstrating the technical competence of Notified Bodies, unless Union product legislation provides otherwise. Regulation No 765/2008
sets out the legal framework for the organisation and operation of the European accreditation system. 1. What is the legal status under Union law
as from the withdrawal date, of accreditation certificates delivered by the UK Accreditation Service (UKAS)?
The UK Accreditation Service will cease to be a national accreditation body within the meaning and for the purposes of Regulation No 765/2008 as from the withdrawal date. As a consequence, its accreditation certificates will no longer be considered as 'accreditation
within the meaning of Regulation No 765/2008 and no longer valid or recognised in the EU-27 pursuant to that Regulation as of the withdrawal date

* * *
Regulation (EC) No. 765/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 9 July 2008 setting out the requirements for accreditation and market surveillance relating to the marketing of products and repealing Regulation (EEC) No 339/93, OJ L 218, 13.8.2008, p. 30.
See also other relevant preparedness notices referring to accreditation, such as the "Notice to stakeholders  withdrawal of the United Kingdom and EU rules on fluorinated greenhouse gases" (https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/file_import/fluorinated-gases_en.pdf

EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL FOR INTERNAL MARKET, INDUSTRY, ENTREPRENEURSHIP AND SMES Brussels, 18 January 2018
OTICE TO STAKEHOLDER
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND EU RULES IN THE FIELD OF PUBLIC PROCUREMENT The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. This means that, unless a ratified withdrawal agreement
establishes another date, all Union primary and secondary law will cease to apply to the United Kingdom from 30 March 2019, 00:00h (CET) ('the withdrawal date').
The United Kingdom will then become a 'third country'.
Preparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for EU and national authorities but also for private parties
In view of the considerable uncertainties, in particular concerning the content of a possible withdrawal agreement, economic operators are reminded of legal repercussions, which need to be considered when the United Kingdom becomes a third country.
Subject to any transitional arrangement that may be contained in a possible withdrawal agreement, as of the withdrawal date the EU rules in the field of public procurement no longer apply to the United Kingdom
This has in particular the following consequences for public procurement procedures launched by EU Member States authorities as of the withdrawal date

Negotiations are ongoing with the United Kingdom with a view to reaching a withdrawal agreement.
Furthermore, in accordance with Article 50(3) of the Treaty on European Union, the European Council, in agreement with the United Kingdom, may unanimously decide that the Treaties cease to apply at a later date.
A third country is a country not member of the EU.
For public procurement procedures that are ongoing on the withdrawal date, the EU is trying to agree solutions with the United Kingdom in the withdrawal agreement. The essential principles of the EU's position on on-going Public Procurement Procedures are available here: https://ec.europa.eu/commission/publications/position-paper-going-public-procurement-procedures_en
5
Thus, all guarantees associated with EU Public Procurement Law will cease to apply to economic operators interested or participating in public procurement procedures in the United Kingdom. See https://ec.europa.eu/commission/sites/beta-political/files/public_procurement.pdf for a list of instruments forming part of the EU Public Procurement Law acquis.
2
conomic operators from the United Kingdom will have the same status as all other economic operators based in a third country with which the EU does not have any agreement providing for the opening of the EU procurement market
They shall therefore be subject to the same rules as any third country tenderer.  Article 85 of Directive 2014/25/EU regulating procurement procedures for the purchase of supplies by entities operating in the water, energy, transport and postal services sectors7, sets forth that tenders submitted in the EU may be rejected if the proportion of the products originating in third countries with which the EU has not concluded an agreement ensuring comparable and effective access for EU undertakings to the markets of those third countries, exceeds 50% of the total value of the products constituting the tender. Even where such offers are not rejected, they shall not lead to the award of a contract if there are equivalent offers with less than 50% of the products originating in third countries. Therefore, tenders in this type of EU procurements offering more than 50% of products originating from the United Kingdom and other third countries may be rejected or may not be awarded a contract.  As clarified by Recital 18 of Directive 2009/81/EC regulating procurement procedures by contracting authorities or entities in the field of defence and securit
, EU Member States will retain the power to decide whether or not their contracting authorities/entities may allow economic operators from third countries to participate in their defence and security procurement procedures.
conomic operators from the United Kingdom may therefore be excluded from bidding for defence and security contracts in the EU.  Furthermore, Article 22 of Directive 2009/81/EC provides that Member States shall recognis
the security clearances which they consider equivalent to those issued in accordance with their national law. Since, as of the withdrawal date
the United Kingdom cease
to be
member of the Union, EU Member States will no longer be under the obligation to recognise security clearance
obtained by an economic operator in the United Kingdom
even where they could consider them as equivalent to their national security clearances. This may lead to the exclusion of operators relying on a United Kingdom security clearance in EU defence and security public procurement procedures. The webpage of the Commission on public procurement
https://ec.europa.eu/growth/single-market/public-procurement_en) provide
for general information concerning public procurement procedures in the EU. This page will be updated with further information, where necessary.
European Commission Directorate-General for Internal Market, Industry, Entrepreneurship and SMEs
This is without prejudice to any possible future accession of the United Kingdom to the Government Procurement Agreement.
OJ L 94, 28.3.2014, p. 243.
OJ L 216, 20.8.2009, p. 76.
EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL FOR INTERNAL MARKET, INDUSTRY, ENTREPRENEURSHIP AND SMES
Brussels, 27 April 2018 Rev1
OTICE TO STAKEHOLDER
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND EU LEGISLATION IN THE FIELD OF SUPPLEMENTARY PROTECTION CERTIFICATES FOR MEDICINAL PRODUCTS AND PLANT PROTECTION PRODUCTS The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. This means that
unless a ratified withdrawal agreement
establishes another date, all Union primary and secondary law will cease to apply to the United Kingdom from 30 March 2019, 00:00h (CET) ('the withdrawal date').
The United Kingdom will then become a 'third country'.
Preparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for EU and national authorities but also for private parties.  In view of the considerable uncertainties, in particular concerning the content of a possible withdrawal agreement, stakeholders are reminded of legal repercussions, which need to be considered when the United Kingdom becomes a third country
Subject to any transitional arrangement that may be contained in a possible withdrawal agreement, as of the withdrawal date, Regulation (EC) No 469/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 6 May 2009 concerning the supplementary protection certificate for medicinal products
and Regulation (EC) No 1610/96 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 July 1996 concerning the creation of a supplementary protection certificate for plant protection products
will no longer apply to the United Kingdom. This has in particular the following consequences

Negotiations are ongoing with the United Kingdom with a view to reaching a withdrawal agreement.
Furthermore, in accordance with Article 50(3) of the Treaty on European Union, the European Council, in agreement with the United Kingdom, may unanimously decide that the Treaties cease to apply at a later date.
A third country is a country not member of the EU.
Regulation (EC) No 469/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 6 May 2009 concerning the supplementary protection certificate for medicinal products, OJ L 152, 16.6.2009, p. 1.
Regulation (EC) No 1610/96 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 July 1996 concerning the creation of a supplementary protection certificate for plant protection products, OJ L 198, 8.8.1996, p. 30.
2 1.
ALCULATION OF DURATION OF SUPPLEMENTARY PROTECTION CERTIFICATES IN THE EU-27
Article 13 of Regulation (EC) No 469/2009 and Article 13 of Regulation (EC) No 1610/96 establish that the supplementary protection certificate shall take effect at the end of the lawful term of the basic patent for a period equal to the period which elapses between the date on which the application for a basic patent was lodged and the date of the first authorisation to place the product on the market in the European Union, reduced by a period of five years.
7 An authorisation to place the product on the market granted by a United Kingdom competent authority as of the withdrawal date will not be considered a first authorisation to place the product on the market in the European Union for the purposes of Article 13 of Regulation (EC) No 469/2009 and Article 13 of Regulation (EC) No 1610/96. However, an authorisation to place the product on the market granted by a United Kingdom competent authority before the withdrawal date is to be considered as the first authorisation to place the product on the market in the European Union for the purposes of Article 13 of Regulation (EC) No 469/2009 and Article 13 of Regulation (EC) No 1610/96 on the duration of the certificate
2.
PPLICATIONS FOR SUPPLEMENTARY PROTECTION CERTIFICATES AS OF THE WITHDRAWAL DATE IN THE UNITED KINGDOM As o
the withdrawal date, Regulation (EC) No 469/2009 and Regulation (EC) No 1610/96 no longer apply to the United Kingdom.
The website of the Commission (https://ec.europa.eu/growth/industry/intellectual-property/patents/supplementary-protection-certificates_en
provide
general information concerning supplementary protection certificates. This page will be updated with further information on the United Kingdom's withdrawal, where necessary.   European Commission
irectorate
eneral for Internal Market, Industry, Entrepreneurship and SMEs
They also state that, in any event, the duration of any certificate may not exceed five years from the date on which it takes effect.
This duration of the certificate for medicinal products may be extended by six months in certain cases, in accordance with Regulation (EC) No 1901/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 December 2006 on medicinal products for paediatric use (OJ L 378, 27.12.2006, p. 1).
Also for the purposes of Article 3(b) of Regulation (EC) No 469/2009, Article 3(1)(b) of Regulation (EC) No 1610/96 (valid authorisation has been granted), Article 8(1)(a)(iv) (content of the application for a certificate)
and
rticle 11(1)(e) (publication) of those Regulations.
For applications for a supplementary protection certificate submitted before the withdrawal date, the EU is trying to agree solutions with the United Kingdom in the withdrawal agreement. The essential principles of the EU's position on Intellectual property rights are available here: https://ec.europa.eu/commission/publications/position-paper-intellectual-property-rights-including-geographical-indications_en

EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL FOR INTERNAL MARKET, INDUSTRY, ENTREPRENEURSHIP AND SMES
Brussels, 21 June 2018
OTICE TO STAKEHOLDER
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND EU RULES IN THE FIELD OF REGULATED PROFESSIONS AND THE RECOGNITION OF
ROFESSIONAL QUALIFICATIONS The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. This means that
unless a ratified withdrawal agreement
establishes another date, all Union primary and secondary law will cease to apply to the United Kingdom from 30 March 2019, 00:00h (CET) ('the withdrawal date').
The United Kingdom will then become a 'third country'.
In view of the considerable uncertainties, in particular concerning the content of a possible withdrawal agreement, all persons who need recognition of their professional qualifications with a view to access a regulated profession are reminded of legal repercussions, which need to be considered when the United Kingdom becomes a third country
Subject to any transitional arrangement that may be contained in a possible withdrawal agreement, as of the withdrawal date, the EU rules in the field of recognition of professional qualifications no longer apply to the United Kingdom. This has in particular the following consequences:
Negotiations are ongoing with the United Kingdom with a view to reaching a withdrawal agreement.
Furthermore, in accordance with Article 50(3) of the Treaty on European Union, the European Council, in agreement with the United Kingdom, may unanimously decide that the Treaties cease to apply at a later date.
A third country is a country not member of the EU.
For recognition procedures that are ongoing on the withdrawal date, the "Joint report from the negotiators of the European Union and the United Kingdom Government on progress during phase 1 of negotiations under Article 50 TEU on the United Kingdom's orderly withdrawal from the European Union" establishes that, in respect of the persons covered in that report, these recognition procedures will be completed under Union law (paragraph 32): https://ec.europa.eu/commission/publications/joint-report-negotiators-european-union-and-united-kingdom-government-progress-during-phase
-negotiations-under-article-50-teu-united-kingdoms-orderly-withdrawal-european-union_en

1.
PPLICATION OF EU RULES ON RECOGNITION OF PROFESSIONAL QUALIFICATIONS  Professionals seeking to access or pursue a regulated profession in a Member State different from the one where they have obtained their qualifications can rely on Directive 2005/36/EC on the recognition of professional qualifications
to have their qualifications recognised by that Member State and to pursue their profession there. Directive 2005/36/EC covers EU citizens with qualifications obtained in one or more EU Member States. Under certain conditions and limitations, Directive 2005/36/EC also covers EU citizens with qualifications obtained in third countries
On the contrary, recognition of qualifications of third country nationals, wherever obtained, is not covered by Directive 2005/36/EC
Directive 2005/36/EC also provides for a mechanism allowing professionals established in one Member State to move and provide regulated professional services in another Member State on a temporal or occasional basis (Articles 5 to 9 of Directive 2005/36/EC). Provision of such services may be subject to a prior declaration, if required by the host Member State. It may also involve a prior check of qualifications for a limited number of professions and only if this is necessary to avoid serious damage to the health or safety of the service recipients (Article 7(4) of Directive 2005/36/EC). Other EU rules may provide for the recognition of professional qualifications in relation to specific regulated professions, such as Directive 2006/43/EC on statutory audits of annual accounts and consolidated accounts
or Directive 98/5/EC to facilitate practice of the profession of lawyer on a permanent basis in a Member
Directive 2005/36/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 7 September 2005 on the recognition of professional qualifications (OJ L 255, 30.9.2005, p. 22).
6
Articles 2(2), 3(3) and 10(g) of Directive 2005/36/EC
7
A number of other EU Directives may, however, offer some limited recognition possibilities to specific categories of third country nationals, e.g. Directive (EU) 2016/801 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 May 2016 on the conditions of entry and residence of third-country nationals for the purposes of research, studies, training, voluntary service, pupil exchange schemes or educational projects and au pairing (OJ L 132, 21.5.2016, p. 21), Directive 2014/36/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 February 2014 on the conditions of entry and stay of third-country nationals for the purpose of employment as seasonal workers (OJ L 94, 28.3.2014, p. 375), Directive 2013/33/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 June 2013 laying down standards for the reception of applicants for international protection (OJ L 180, 29.6.2013, p. 96). Directive 2011/95/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 December 2011 on standards for the qualification of third-country nationals or stateless persons as beneficiaries of international protection, for a uniform status for refugees or for persons eligible for subsidiary protection, and for the content of the protection granted (OJ L 337, 20.12.2011, p. 9), Council Directive 2009/50/EC of 25 May 2009 on the conditions of entry and residence of third-country nationals for the purposes of highly qualified employment (OJ L 155, 18.6.2009, p. 17), Council Directive 2005/71/EC of 12 October 2005 on a specific procedure for admitting third-country nationals for the purposes of scientific research (OJ L 289, 3.11.2005, p. 15), Council Directive 2003/109/EC of 25 November 2003 concerning the status of third-country nationals who are long-term residents (OJ L 16, 23.1.2004, p. 44).
Directive 2006/43/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 17 May 2006 on statutory audits of annual accounts and consolidated accounts (OJ L 157, 9.6.2006, p. 87).
3 State other than that in which the qualification was obtained
This notice does not deal with the recognition of professional qualifications pursuant to those other rules.10 2.
ECOGNITION
OF PROFESSIONAL QUALIFICATIONS RECOGNISED BEFORE THE WITHDRAWAL DATE The withdrawal of the United Kingdom does not affect decisions on the recognition of professional qualifications obtained in the United Kingdom taken before the withdrawal date on the basis of Directive 2005/36/EC by an EU-27 Member State
3.
ECOGNITION
AS OF
HE WITHDRAWAL DATE OF PROFESSIONAL QUALIFICATIONS  As of the withdrawal date, United Kingdom nationals will be third country nationals and hence Directive 2005/36/EC no longer applies to them. It follows that:  The recognition of professional qualifications of United Kingdom nationals in an EU-27 Member State will be governed by the national policies and rules of that Member State, irrespective of whether the qualifications of the United Kingdom national were obtained in the United Kingdom, in another third country or in an EU-27 Member State.
The temporary or occasional provision of services by United Kingdom nationals in an EU-27 Member State, even if they are already legally established in an EU-27 Member State will be governed by the national policies and rules of that Member State.  Concerning EU-27 nationals, qualifications obtained in the United Kingdom (hereafter "UK professional qualifications") as of the withdrawal date are third country qualifications for the purpose of EU law. Recognition of such a qualification is no longer covered by the recognition regime of Directive 2005/36/EC
both in respect of EU citizens and of United Kingdom nationals) but, in accordance with Article 2(2) of Directive 2005/36/EC, the recognition will be governed by the national policies and rules of each of the EU-27 Member State

Directive 98/5/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 February 1998 to facilitate practice of the profession of lawyer on a permanent basis in a Member State other than that in which the qualification was obtained (OJ L 77, 14.3.1998, p. 36). 10
EU rules on specific professional occupations are addressed in sectorial "Notices to stakeholders", for example as regards train drivers (see "Notice to stakeholders
Withdrawal of the United Kingdom and EU rules in the field of rail transport"), aviation personnel, such as pilots and cabin crew (see "Notice to stakeholders
Withdrawal of the United Kingdom and EU aviation safety rules")
seafarers (see "Notice to stakeholders
Withdrawal of the United Kingdom and EU rules on the minimum level of training of seafarers and the mutual recognition of seafarers' certificates"), boatmasters on inland waterways (see "Notice to stakeholders
Withdrawal of the United Kingdom and EU rules in the field of inland waterways"), auditors (see "Notice to stakeholders
Withdrawal of the United Kingdom and EU rules in the field of statutory audit"), or persons engaged in road transport (see "Notice to stakeholders
Withdrawal of the United Kingdom and EU rules in the field of road transport"; see also "Notice to stakeholders
Withdrawal of the United Kingdom and EU rules for authorisations and certificates for transporters of live animals, drivers and attendants"). All "Notices to stakeholders" are available here: https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness_en

EU-27 national
holding UK professional qualifications obtained before the withdrawal date should consult the relevant national authorities to assess whether it is advisable to obtain, before the withdrawal date, the recognition of those UK professional qualification
in an EU-27 Member State.
The website of the Commission on free movement of professionals provide
for general information concerning recognition issues. (https://ec.europa.eu/growth/single-market/services/free-movement-professionals/qualifications-recognition_en
These pages will be updated with further information, where necessary.
European Commission
irectorate
eneral for the Internal Market, Industry, Entrepreneurship and SMEs
EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL FOR INTERNAL MARKET, INDUSTRY, ENTREPRENEURSHIP AND SMEs
Brussels, 25 September 2018
OTICE TO STAKEHOLDER
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND EU RULES IN THE FIELD OF PYROTECHNIC ARTICLES The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. This means that unless a ratified withdrawal agreement
establishes another date or the period is extended by the European Council in accordance with Article 50(3) of the Treaty on European Union, all Union primary and secondary law will cease to apply to the United Kingdom from 30 March 2019, 00:00h (CET) ('the withdrawal date'). The United Kingdom will then become a 'third country'.
Preparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for EU and national authorities but also for private parties. In view of the considerable uncertainties, in particular concerning the content of a possible withdrawal agreement, economic operators in the field of pyrotechnic articles are reminded of legal repercussions, which need to be considered when the United Kingdom becomes a third country. Subject to any transitional arrangement that may be contained in a possible withdrawal agreement, as of the withdrawal date, the EU rules in the field of pyrotechnic articles, and in particular Directive 2013/29/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 June 2013 on the harmonisation of the laws of the Member States relating to the making available on the market of pyrotechnic articles
no longer apply to the United Kingdom. This has in particular the following consequences for pyrotechnic articles placed on the EU market as of the withdrawal date:

Negotiations are ongoing with the United Kingdom with a view to reaching a withdrawal agreement.
A third country is a country not member of the EU
3
OJ L 178, 28.6.2013, p. 27.
In the context of the negotiations of the EU-UK withdrawal agreement, the EU is trying to agree solutions with the United Kingdom concerning goods placed on the EU market before the end of the transition period. See, in particular, the latest text of the draft withdrawal agreement agreed at negotiator's level, which is available here: https://ec.europa.eu/commission/sites/beta-political/files/draft_agreement_coloured.pdf
1.
BLIGATIONS OF IMPORTERS
CONFORMITY ASSESSMENT PROCEDURES AND NOTIFIED BODIES The Notice to stakeholders  Withdrawal of the United Kingdom and EU rules in the field of industrial products
is also relevant for the EU rules on pyrotechnic articles. This holds in particular for the identification of economic operators (an economic operator established in the EU-27 who, prior to the withdrawal date, was considered as an EU distributor will become an importer for the purpose of Directive 201
29/EU), and the requirement to hold a certificate issued by an EU-27 notified body as of the withdrawal date
2.
ABELLING OF PYROTECHNIC ARTICLES According to Article 1 of Commission Implementing Directive 2014/58/EU setting up a system for the traceability of pyrotechnic articles6, pyrotechnic products have to be labelled with a registration number comprising, inter alia, the identification number of the notified body, as well as the processing number used by the notified body for the pyrotechnic article. The registration number is assigned by the notified body.
As of the withdrawal date, pyrotechnic articles placed on the EU market can no longer be labelled with a registration number assigned by a notified body established in the United Kingdom.
The website of the Commission on the EU legislation on pyrotechnic articles (https://ec.europa.eu/growth/sectors/chemicals/legislation_en#pyrotechnics) provide for general information concerning pyrotechnic articles. These pages will be updated with further information, where necessary.
European Commission Directorate-General for Internal Market, Industry, Entrepreneurship and SMEs
https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness/preparedness-notices_en#grow
6
OJ L 115, 17.4.2014, p. 28.
See recital 2 of Commission Implementing Directive 2014/58/EU.
EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL FOR INTERNAL MARKET, INDUSTRY, ENTREPRENEURSHIP AND SMEs
Brussels, 25 September 2018
OTICE TO STAKEHOLDER
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND EU RULES IN THE FIELD OF EXPLOSIVES FOR CIVIL USES The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. This means that unless a ratified withdrawal agreement
establishes another date or the period is extended by the European Council in accordance with Article 50(3) of the Treaty on European Union, all Union primary and secondary law will cease to apply to the United Kingdom from 30 March 2019, 00:00h (CET) ('the withdrawal date'). The United Kingdom will then become a 'third country'.
Preparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for EU and national authorities but also for private parties
In view of the considerable uncertainties, in particular concerning the content of a possible withdrawal agreement, economic operators in the field of explosives for civil uses are reminded of legal repercussions, which need to be considered when the United Kingdom becomes a third country
Subject to any transitional arrangement that may be contained in a possible withdrawal agreement, as of the withdrawal date, the EU rules in the field of explosives for civil uses, in particular Directive 2014/28/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 February 2014 on the harmonisation of the laws of the Member States relating to the making available on the market and supervision of explosives for civil uses,
no longer apply to the United Kingdom. This has in particular the following consequences in the area of explosives for civil uses placed on the EU market as of the withdrawal date:

Negotiations are ongoing with the United Kingdom with a view to reaching a withdrawal agreement.
A third country is a country not member of the EU
3
OJ L 96, 29.3.2014, p. 1.
In the context of the negotiations of the EU-UK withdrawal agreement, the EU is trying to agree solutions with the United Kingdom concerning goods placed on the EU market before the end of the transition period. See, in particular, the latest text of the draft withdrawal agreement agreed at negotiator's level, which is available here: https://ec.europa.eu/commission/sites/beta-political/files/draft_agreement_coloured.pdf
2 1.
BLIGATIONS OF IMPORTERS
CONFORMITY ASSESSMENT PROCEDURES AND NOTIFIED BODIES The Notice to stakeholders  Withdrawal of the United Kingdom and EU rules in the field of industrial products
is also relevant for the EU rules on explosives for civil uses. This holds in particular for the identification of economic operators (an economic operator established in the EU-27 who, prior to the withdrawal date, was considered an EU distributor will become an importer for the purpose of Directive 2014/28/EU), and the requirement to hold a certificate issued by an EU-27 notified body as of the withdrawal date. 2.
ARKING OF EXPLOSIVES FOR CIVIL USES According to Article 3(1) of Commission Directive 2008/43/EC setting up a system for the identification and traceability of explosives for civil uses6, applicable by virtue of Article 51(3) of Directive 2014/28/EU, explosives manufactured or imported shall be marked with a unique identification. According to the second indent of Article 3(5) of Commission Directive 2008/43/EC, where a manufacturing site is located outside the EU and the manufacturer is not established in the EU, the importer shall contact the Member State of import in order for the manufacturing site to be attributed a code. As of the withdrawal date, manufacturing sites in the United Kingdom will be identified as located outside the Union and will require a code to be attributed by the national authority of the EU-27 Member State of import. According to Article 3(2) Commission Directive 2008/43/EC, where explosives for civil uses are manufactured in the EU for export, a unique identification mark is not required if the importing third country requires an identification which allows traceability of the explosives. The question whether, as of the withdrawal date, this exception applies for explosives for civil uses manufactured in the EU-27 for export to the United Kingdom will depend on whether the United Kingdom will have, as of the withdrawal date, national identification requirements in place.
The website of the Commission on the EU legislation on explosives for civil uses
https://ec.europa.eu/growth/sectors/chemicals/legislation_en#explosives) provide for general information concerning explosives for civil uses. These pages will be updated with further information, where necessary.
European Commission
irectorate
eneral for Internal Market, Industry, Entrepreneurship and SMEs

https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness/preparedness-notices_en#grow
6
OJ L 94, 5.4.2008, p. 8.
EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL FOR INTERNAL MARKET, INDUSTRY, ENTREPRENEURSHIP AND SMES Brussels,
September 2018 Rev1
OTICE TO STAKEHOLDERS
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND EU RULES IN THE FIELD OF FERTILISERS The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. This means that unless a ratified withdrawal agreement
establishes another date or the period is extended by the European Council in accordance with Article 50(3) of the Treaty on European Union, all Union primary and secondary law will cease to apply to the United Kingdom from 30 March 2019, 00:00h (CET) ('the withdrawal date'). The United Kingdom will then become a 'third country'.
Preparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for EU and national authorities but also for private parties.  In view of the considerable uncertainties, in particular concerning the content of a possible withdrawal agreement, economic operators in the field of fertilisers are reminded of legal repercussions, which need to be considered when the United Kingdom becomes a third country. Subject to any transitional arrangement that may be contained in a possible withdrawal agreement, as of the withdrawal date, the EU rules in the field of EC fertilisers3, in particular Regulation (EC) No 2003/2003 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 October 2003 relating to fertilisers,
will no longer apply to the United Kingdom. This has in particular the following consequences in the area of EC fertilisers placed on the EU market as of the withdrawal date

Negotiations are ongoing with the United Kingdom with a view to reaching a withdrawal agreement.
A third country is a country not member of the EU.
An "EC fertiliser" is a fertiliser belonging to a type of fertilisers listed in Regulation (EC) No 2003/2003 and complying with that Regulation.
OJ L 304, 21.11.2003, p. 1
5
In the context of the negotiations of the EU-UK withdrawal agreement, the EU is trying to agree solutions with the United Kingdom concerning goods placed on the EU market before the end of the transition period. See, in particular, the latest text of the draft withdrawal agreement agreed at negotiator's level, which is available here: https://ec.europa.eu/commission/sites/beta-political/files/draft_agreement_coloured.pdf
2 1.
ESPONSIBILITIES FOR IMPORTERS According to Article 2(x) of Regulation (EC) No 2003/2003, a manufacturer is the person responsible for placing a fertiliser on the EU market
The notion covers not only a producer, but also an importer.
According to Article 4 of Regulation (EC) No 2003/2003, manufacturers of fertilisers shall be established in the Union, and take responsibility for the conformity of EC fertilisers with that Regulation. The manufacturer is also responsible for providing EC fertilisers with identification markings (Article
of Regulation (EC) No 2003/2003), ensuring traceability (Article 8 of Regulation (EC) No 2003/2003), and complying with the specific rules for ammonium nitrate fertilisers of high nitrogen content (Articles 26 and 27 of Regulation (EC) No 2003/2003).
As of the withdrawal date, a manufacturer established in the United Kingdom will no longer be an economic operator established in the EU. As a consequence, an economic operator established in the EU-27 and placing EC fertilisers coming from the United Kingdom on the EU-27 market, until then considered as a distributor, will become an EU importer in relation to such products. This operator will therefore have to comply with the above-mentioned obligations for manufacturers.  2.
ARKINGS According to Article 9(1)(a), 11th indent, of Regulation (EC) No 2003/2003, packages, labels and accompanying documents of fertilisers shall bear the name or trade name and address of the manufacturer. If, prior to the withdrawal date, the manufacturer was established in the United Kingdom, the marking of the manufacturer on the packages, labels and accompanying documents has to be changed accordingly
The website of the Commission on the EU legislation for chemicals legislation (https://ec.europa.eu/growth/sectors/chemicals/legislation_en
provide
for general information concerning fertilisers
These pages will be updated with further information, where necessary.
European Commission
irectorate
eneral for Internal Market, Industry, Entrepreneurship and SMEs
By contrast, a distributor who does not change the characteristics of the fertiliser shall not be deemed to be a manufacturer, Article 2(x) of Regulation (EC) No 2003/2003
EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL FOR INTERNAL MARKET, INDUSTRY, ENTREPRENEURSHIP AND SMES
Brussels, 27 September 2018
OTICE TO STAKEHOLDER
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND EU RULES IN THE FIELD OF DETERGENTS The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. This means that unless a ratified withdrawal agreement
establishes another date or the period is extended by the European Council in accordance with Article 50(3) of the Treaty on European Union, all Union primary and secondary law will cease to apply to the United Kingdom from 30 March 2019, 00:00h (CET) ('the withdrawal date'). The United Kingdom will then become a 'third country'.
Preparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for EU and national authorities but also for private parties.  In view of the considerable uncertainties, in particular concerning the content of a possible withdrawal agreement, economic operators in the field of detergents are reminded of the legal repercussions, which need to considered when the United Kingdom becomes a third country
Subject to any transitional arrangement that may be contained in a possible withdrawal agreement, as of the withdrawal date, the EU rules in the field of detergents, in particular Regulation (EC) No 648/2004 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 31 March 2004 on detergents
no longer apply to the United Kingdom. This has in particular the following consequences for detergents placed on the EU market as of the withdrawal date

Negotiations are ongoing with the United Kingdom with a view to reaching a withdrawal agreement.
A third country is a country not member of the EU
3
OJ L 104, 8.4.2004, p. 1
4
In the context of the negotiations of the EU-UK withdrawal agreement, the EU is trying to agree solutions with the United Kingdom concerning goods placed on the EU market before the end of the transition period. See, in particular, the latest text of the draft withdrawal agreement agreed at negotiator's level, which is available here: https://ec.europa.eu/commission/sites/beta-political/files/draft_agreement_coloured.pdf
2 1.
ESPONSIBILITIES FOR IMPORTERS According to Article 2(10) of Regulation (EC) No 648/2004, a manufacturer is the person responsible for placing a detergent or a surfactant for a detergent on the EU market
The notion covers not only a producer, but also an importer. According to Article 3(2) of Regulation (EC) No 648/2004, manufacturers of detergents or surfactants for detergents shall be established in the Union, and take responsibility for the conformity of detergents or surfactants for detergents with that Regulation.  As of the withdrawal date, a manufacturer established in the United Kingdom will no longer be an economic operator established in the EU. As a consequence, an economic operator established in the EU-27 and placing detergents or surfactants for detergents coming from the United Kingdom on the EU-27 market, until then considered as a distributor, will become an EU importer in relation to such products. This operator will have to comply with the obligations for manufacturer
2.
ABELLING According to Article 11(2)(b) of Regulation (EC) No 648/2004, detergents must be labelled with the name or trademark of the party responsible for placing the product on the market. If, prior to the withdrawal date, the manufacturer was established in the United Kingdom, the marking of the manufacturer on the packages, labels and accompanying documents has to be changed accordingly
3.
PPROVED LABORATORIES Based on Article
3 and 4, as well as Annexes II, III, IV and VIII to Regulation (EC) No 648/2004 the following tests are required
Primary biodegradability test
for surfactants in detergents
Ultimate biodegradability (mineralisation) test
for surfactants in detergents
Complementary risk assessment for surfactants in detergents
According to Article 8(2) of Regulation (EC) No 648/2004, these tests have to be carried out by laboratories approved by a Member State.
Compliance with this requirement is controlled on products placed on the market.
For detergents placed on the market as of the withdrawal date, tests supporting the safety of detergents according to Regulation (EC) No 648/2004 have to have been carried out by a laboratory approved by an EU-27 Member State. The website of the Commission on Chemical Legislation
https://ec.europa.eu/growth/sectors/chemicals/legislation_en) provide
for general
The list of approved laboratories is published here: http://ec.europa.eu/growth/sectors/chemicals/legislation_en
6
Article 10 of Regulation (EC) No 648/2004
3 information concerning detergents. These pages will be updated with further information, where necessary.
European Commission
irectorate
eneral for Internal Market, Industry, Entrepreneurship and SMEs

EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL FOR INTERNAL MARKET, INDUSTRY, ENTREPRENEURSHIP AND SMES
Brussels, 18 July 2019 REV1  replaces the notice dated 29 November 2018
OTICE TO STAKEHOLDER
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND EU RULES IN THE FIELD OF COSMETIC PRODUCTS The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union (TEU). Following
request by the United Kingdom, the European Council (Article 50) agreed on 11 April 2019
to extend further
the period provided for in Article 50(3) TEU until 31 October 2019.
This means that the United Kingdom will be, as of 1 November 2019
5 Preparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for EU and national authorities but also for private parties.  In view of the uncertainties surrounding the ratification of the Withdrawal Agreement
all interested parties, and especially economic operators, are reminded of legal repercussions, which need to be considered when the United Kingdom becomes a third country. Subject to the transition period provided for in the Withdrawal Agreement,
as of the withdrawal date the EU rules in the field of cosmetic products, in particular Regulation (EC) No 1223/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 30
European Council Decision (EU) 2019/584, OJ L 101, 11.4.2019, p. 1.
Following a request by the United Kingdom, the European Council had decided a first extension on 22 March 2019 (European Council Decision (EU) 2019/476, OJ L 80 I, 22.3.2019, p. 1).
On 11 April 2019, following a second request for an extension by the United Kingdom, the European Council also decided that the decision to extend until 31 October 2019 would cease to apply on 31 May 2019 if the United Kingdom had not held elections to the European Parliament and had not ratified the Withdrawal Agreement by 22 May 2019. As the United Kingdom had not ratified the Withdrawal Agreement by 22 May 2019, it held European elections on 23 May 2019.
A third country is a country not member of the EU.
In addition, if the Withdrawal Agreement is ratified by both parties before that date, the withdrawal takes place on the first day of the month following the completion of the ratification procedures.
Agreement on the withdrawal of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland from the European Union and the European Atomic Energy Community, OJ C 144 I, 25
.2019, p. 1
7
It is recalled that, in order for the transition period to apply, the Withdrawal Agreement has to be ratified by the EU and the United Kingdom

November 2009 on cosmetic products
no longer apply to the United Kingdom. This has in particular the following consequences for cosmetic products placed on the EU market as of the withdrawal date:  1.
ESPONSIBLE PERSON According to Article 4 of Regulation (EC) No 1223/2009, only cosmetic products for which a legal or natural person is designated within the EU responsible person shall ensure compliance with the relevant obligations set out in Article 5 of Regulation (EC) No 1223/2009
According to Article 4(3) of Regulation (EC) No 1223/2009, for cosmetic products manufactured within the EU, the responsible person shall be the manufacturer established within the EU (by default) or a person who is established within the EU and is designated by written mandate by the manufacturer and has accepted in writing.  According to Article 4(5) of Regulation (EC) No 1223/2009, for cosmetics imported into the EU from a third country, the importer becomes the responsible person (by default) or can designate by written mandate another person to be the responsible person, also
stablished within the EU
who shall accept in writing.  As of the withdrawal date, responsible persons can no longer be established in the United Kingdom. Rather:  If the cosmetic product is manufactured in the United Kingdom, the importer in the EU-27 becomes the responsible person (by default) or can designate by written mandate another person to be the responsible person, also established within the EU, who shall accept in writing.   The same applies if the cosmetic product is manufactured in another third country, imported into the United Kingdom and subsequently imported into the EU-27. Where, currently, a responsible person established in the United Kingdom is designated by an EU-27 manufacturer/importer, that manufacturer/importer should take the necessary measures to ensure that, after the withdrawal date, a responsible person is established in the EU-27 2.
OTIFICATION IN THE COSMETIC PRODUCT NOTIFICATION PORTAL According to Article 13(1) of Regulation (EC) No 1223/2009, prior to placing the cosmetic product on the market, the responsible person shall notify a list of information relating to the cosmetic product to the Commission, through the Cosmetic Product Notification Portal
(CPNP

OJ L 342, 22.12.2009, p. 59.
https://ec.europa.eu/growth/sectors/cosmetics/cpnp_en.
3 As of the withdrawal date, prior to placing a cosmetic product on the EU-27 market, the new responsible person in the EU-27 will have to make product notifications in the CPNP.  As regards existing notifications made before the withdrawal date by a responsible person established in the United Kingdom, the CPNP offers the possibility to transfer notifications to another responsible person. Thus, a UK-based responsible person can transfer an existing notification to the future EU-27 responsible person. This EU-27 responsible person will then be able to edit the notification and complete it by adding its own required information, such as the name and address of the responsible person (point (b) of the first subparagraph of Article 13(1) of Regulation (EC) No 1223/2009), and the new labelling (Article 13(2) of Regulation (EC) No 1223/2009; see also the section 4 of this notice). However, this transfer in CPNP is only possible until the withdrawal date. As of the withdrawal date, the former UK-based responsible person will no longer have access to the CPNP.
ew responsible persons established in the EU-27 can already indicate before the withdrawal date that cosmetic products manufactured in the United Kingdom will be, as of the withdrawal date, imported into the Union from the United Kingdom as a country of origin.  3.
RODUCT INFORMATION FILE (PIF) According to Article 11 of Regulation (EC) No 1223/2009, when a cosmetic product is placed on the market, the responsible person shall keep a product information file (PIF
for the cosmetic product for a period of ten years.  The PIF shall be readily accessible in electronic or other format at the address of the responsible person, as indicated on the label of the cosmetic product
to the competent authority of the Member State in which the PIF is kept. The information in the PIF shall be available in a language that can be easily understood by the competent authority of the Member State. As of the withdrawal date, the PIF has to be made available at the address of the responsible person in the EU-27 and adapted in terms of the language requirements of the Member State in question.
4.
ABELLING According to Article 19 of Regulation (EC) No 1223/2009, the name and address of the responsible person shall be indicated on the label of cosmetic products. The country of origin shall be specified for imported cosmetic products. As of the withdrawal date, cosmetic products manufactured in the United Kingdom and placed on the EU market will be a cosmetic product imported into the EU-27 from a third country
The country of origin will need to be specified for these imported cosmetic products.

5.
AFETY ASSESSOR
ccording to Article 10(1) of Regulation (EC) No 1223/2009, the responsible person shall, prior to placing a cosmetic product on the market, ensure that the cosmetic product has undergone a safety assessment on the basis of the relevant information and that a cosmetic product safety report is drawn up in accordance with Annex I to Regulation (EC) No 1223/2009 and the related Guidelines laid down in Commission Implementing Decision 2013/674/EU of 25 November 2013.10 The cosmetic product safety report is included in the PIF
Pursuant to Article 10(2) of Regulation (EC) No 1223/2009, the cosmetic product safety assessment be carried out by a person in possession of a diploma or other evidence of formal qualifications awarded on completion of a university course of theoretical and practical study in pharmacy, toxicology, medicine or a similar discipline, or a course recognised as equivalent by a Member State.
Section 4.4 of the Guidelines on Annex I to Regulation (EC) No 1223/2009 requires needed, proof of equivalence) to be provided with the cosmetic product safety report.
As of the withdrawal date, qualifications from the United Kingdom which have not been recognised as equivalent by an EU-27 Member State can no longer be relied on for the purpose of fulfilling the requirements of Article 10(2) of Regulation (EC) No 1223/2009. It follows that:   for a cosmetic product placed on the Union (EU-27) market prior to the withdrawal date: cosmetic product safety assessments carried out and safety reports drawn up prior to the withdrawal date by a safety assessor holding qualifications from the United Kingdom will remain valid.   for any cosmetic product placed on the Union (EU-27) market as of the withdrawal date: the cosmetic product safety assessment must have been carried out and the safety report drawn up by a safety assessor who, on the date of placing on the market, fulfils the requirements of Article 10(2) of Regulation No 1223/2009, i.e. holds the necessary qualifications from an EU-27 Member State.
Safety assessors currently holding qualifications from the United Kingdom are therefore advised to seek, before the withdrawal date, recognition of equivalence from an EU-27 Member State in order for their credentials to remain compliant with the requirements of Article 10(2) of Regulation No 1223/2009
The website of the Commission on EU rules on cosmetic products (http://ec.europa.eu/growth/sectors/cosmetics/legislation_en) provide
general information concerning Union legislation applicable to cosmetics. These pages will be updated with further information, where necessary.
European Commission
Directorate-General for Internal Market, Industry, Entrepreneurship and SMEs                                                  10
OJ L 315, 26.11.2013, p. 82.
EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL INTERNAL MARKET, INDUSTRY,  ENTREPRENEURSHIP
Brussels, 5 April 2019
OTICE TO STAKEHOLDER
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND EU RULES IN THE FIELD OF RECREATIONAL CRAFT AND PERSONAL WATERCRAFT The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union . On 22 March 2019, the European Council (Article 50) decided, in agreement with the United Kingdom, and in the event that the Withdrawal Agreement is approved by the House of Commons by 29 March, to extend the 2-years period provided for in Article 50(3) TEU until 22 May 2019.  In the event that the Withdrawal Agreement is not approved by the House of Commons by 29 March 2019, the European Council decided to extend the period provided for in Article 50(3) TEU until 12 April 2019. This means that as from 13 April 2019, 00:00h (CET)
he United Kingdom may be a third country
Preparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for EU and national authorities but also for private parties.  In view of the uncertainties surrounding the ratification of the Withdrawal Agreement, all interested parties, and especially economic operators, are reminded of legal repercussions, which need to be considered when the United Kingdom becomes a third country
Subject to the transition period provided for in the Withdrawal Agreement,
as of the withdrawal date the EU rules on recreational craft and personal watercraft, and in particular Directive 2013/53/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 20 November 2013 on recreational craft and personal watercraft
will no longer apply to the United Kingdom. This has in particular the consequences set out below for recreational craft and personal watercraft placed on the Union (EU-27) market as of the withdrawal date.
A third country is a country not member of the EU.
Cf. Part four of the Agreement on the withdrawal of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland from the European Union and the European Atomic Energy Community (OJ, C 66 I, 19.2.2019, p. 1
3     OJ L 354, 28.12.2013, p. 90.
2 This notice should be read in conjunction with the rs  withdrawal of 22 January 2018
and the related document of 1 February 2019.
1.
SSIGNMENT OF THE UNIQUE CODE OF THE MANUFACTURER
ENERAL REQUIREMENTS Point 2.1 of Part A of Annex I to Directive 2013/53/EU requires each watercraft to unique code of the manufacturer assigned by the national authority of the Member State Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2017/1 of 3 January 2017 on procedures for watercraft identification
provides that the unique code of the manufacturer is assigned by Member State authorities or authorised national bodies.
Manufacturers established in a Member State shall apply for the assignment of the unique code to the national authority or national body in the Member State in which they are established.
Manufacturers established in a third country shall apply to the national authority or national body in the Member State in which they intend to place the watercraft on the market. The application shall be made only in one Member State.
Watercraft placed on the Union (EU-27) market before the withdrawal date with a UK-granted unique code of the manufacturer can continue to be made available in the EU-27 market or remain in use after the withdrawal date.  However, it will no longer be possible to place on the market watercraft bearing a UK-granted unique code of the manufacturer as of the withdrawal date. The manufacturers concerned should therefore obtain a new unique code from an EU-27 Member State. 1.1.
onsequences for manufacturers established in the UK with the unique code of the manufacturer assigned by the UK authorities
anufacturers established in the UK who currently have the unique code of the manufacturer assigned by the UK authorities and who intend to place their products on the EU-27 market as of the withdrawal date will be considered as manufacturers established in a third country. They will therefore have to apply for the assignment of a new unique code of the manufacturer to the
https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/file_import/industrial_products_en_1.pdf
5
https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/qa_brexit_industrial_products_en.pdf
6
OJ L 1, 4.1.2017, p. 1.
Articles 4 and 5 of Implementing Regulation (EU) 2017/1.
Article 6 of Implementing Regulation (EU) 2017/1
9
Article 7 of Implementing Regulation (EU) 2017/1.
3 national authorities of the EU-27 Member State in which the manufacturer intends to place the watercraft on the market.  1.2. Consequences for manufacturers established in a third country with the unique code of the manufacturer assigned by the UK authorities
anufacturers established in a third country who currently have the unique code of the manufacturer assigned by the UK authorities and intend to place their products on the EU-27 market as of the withdrawal date will have to apply for the assignment of a new unique code of the manufacturer to the national authorities of the EU-27 Member State in which they intend to place the watercraft on the market
1.3. Consequences for manufacturers established in the EU-27 with the unique code of the manufacturer assigned by an EU-27 Member State No consequence
2.
SSIGNMENT OF THE UNIQUE CODE OF THE MANUFACTURER
ROCEDURE IN CASE OF POST-CONSTRUCTION CONFORMITY ASSESSMENT When the post-construction conformity assessment procedure referred to in Articles 19 and 23 of Directive 2013/53/EU is applied, the unique code of the manufacturer is replaced by the post-construction assessment identification code assigned to the notified body by the national authority of the Member State where the notified body is established.10 For products placed on the Union market as of the withdrawal date that have been assessed according to the post-construction assessment procedure, the post
onstruction assessment identification code will therefore be issued by the national authority of the Member State where the EU-27 notified body is established. Please refer to the abovementioned Notice to stakeholders in the field of industrial products and its related Questions and Answers document for further information assessment procedures requiring the intervention of a notified body. The website of the Commission on the recreational craft sector
(https://ec.europa.eu/growth/sectors/maritime/recreational-crafts_en) provide
general information concerning Union harmonisation legislation applicable to recreational craft and personal watercraft. These pages will be updated with further information, where necessary.
European Commission
irectorate
eneral Internal Market, Industry, Entrepreneurship and SMEs                                                   10
The fourth paragraph of Section 3 of Annex V to Directive 2013/53/EU and Article 8 of Implementing Regulation (EU) 2017/1
EUROPEAN COMMISSION
irectorate-General for Internal Market, Industry, Entrepreneurship and SME

Brussels, 28 June 2019
OTICE TO STAKEHOLDER
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND EU RULES IN THE FIELD OF GOOD LABORATORY PRACTICE (GLP) The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union (TEU). Following
request by the United Kingdom, the European Council (Article 50) agreed on 11 April 2019
to extend further
the period provided for in Article 50(3) TEU until 31 October 2019.
This means that the United Kingdom will be, as of 1 November 2019
a third country

Preparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for EU and national authorities but also for private parties. In view of the uncertainties surrounding the ratification of the Withdrawal Agreement, all interested parties, and especially economic operators, are reminded of legal repercussions, which need to be considered when the United Kingdom becomes a third country
Subject to the transition period provided for in the Withdrawal Agreement,
as of the withdrawal date the EU rules in the field of Good Laboratory Practice, and in particular Directive 2004/9/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 February 2004 on the inspection and verification of good laboratory practice (GLP)
and Directive
European Council Decision (EU) 2019/584, OJ L 101, 11.4.2019, p. 1.
Following a request by the United Kingdom, the European Council had decided a first extension on 22 March 2019 (European Council Decision (EU) 2019/476, OJ L 80 I, 22.3.2019, p. 1).
On 11 April 2019, following a second request for an extension by the United Kingdom, the European Council also decided that the decision to extend until 31 October 2019 would cease to apply on 31 May 2019 if the United Kingdom had not held elections to the European Parliament and had not ratified the Withdrawal Agreement by 22 May 2019. As the United Kingdom had not ratified the Withdrawal Agreement by 22 May 2019, it held European elections on 23 May 2019.
A third country is a country not member of the EU.
In addition, if the Withdrawal Agreement is ratified by both parties before that date, the withdrawal takes place on the first day of the month following the completion of the ratification procedures.
Cf. Part four of the Agreement on the withdrawal of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland from the European Union and the European Atomic Energy Community (OJ C 144 I, 25
.2019, p. 1

OJ L 50, 20.02.2004, p. 28
2 2004/10/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 February 2004 on the harmonisation of laws, regulations and administrative provisions relating to the application of the principles of good laboratory practice and the verification of their applications for tests on chemical substances
no longer apply to the United Kingdom. This has in particular the following consequences: 1.
ECOGNITION OF TESTS OF CHEMICAL PRODUCTS According to Article 5(1) of Directive 2004/10/EC, Member States may not, on grounds relating to good laboratory practice (GLP), prohibit, restrict or impede the placing on the market of chemical products if the tests on the chemical product were performed in another Member State. As of the withdrawal date, this principle of mutual recognition set out in EU law no longer applies to the tests that were conducted in the United Kingdom. auspices of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) will apply as of the withdrawal date.
All Member States participating in the MAD system must accept data from OECD members
which are full adherents to the MAD system having passed a successful evaluation by OECD under the OECD GLP Compliance Monitoring Programme
The United Kingdom is an OECD member and a full adherent to the MAD system, as are Belgium, Czechia, Denmark, Germany, Estonia, Ireland, Greece, Spain
France, Italy, Hungary, the Netherlands, Austria, Poland, Portugal, Slovenia, Slovakia, Finland and Sweden. Thus, the mutual acceptance under the MAD system will apply, as of the withdrawal date, between the United Kingdom and these EU Member States.  The mutual acceptance under the MAD system in relation to the United Kingdom does not apply to EU Member States which are:  participating in the OECD GLP Compliance Monitoring Programme, but have not yet been successfully evaluated (Latvia, Lithuania and Luxembourg). While these EU Member States would have to accept data from the United Kingdom under the MAD system, the United Kingdom would not have to accept data from them; or  not participating in the OECD GLP Compliance Monitoring Programme
Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, Malta and Romania). 2.
THER ASPECTS Directive 2004/9/EC provides for a system of cooperation and information exchange between EU Member States. As of the withdrawal date, all cooperation procedures based on EU law between the EU-27 Member States and the United Kingdom stop.
OJ L 50, 20.02.2004, p. 44
9
Decision of the OECD Council concerning the mutual acceptance of data in the assessment of chemicals, C(81)30(final)
3 The website of the Commission on Good Laboratory Practice
http://ec.europa.eu/growth/sectors/chemicals/good-laboratory-practice_en) provide
general information concerning GLP. These pages will be updated with further information, where necessary. European Commission
irectorate
eneral for Internal Market, Industry, Entrepreneurship and SMEs EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL HUMAN RESOURCES AND SECURITY Brussels, 5 July 2018
OTICE TO STAKEHOLDER
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND EU RULES IN THE FIELD OF INDUSTRIAL SECURITY The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. This means that, unless a ratified withdrawal agreement
establishes another date, all Union primary and secondary law will cease to apply to the United Kingdom from 30 March 2019, 00:00h (CET) ('the withdrawal date').
The United Kingdom will then become a 'third country'.
Preparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for EU and national authorities but also for private parties. In view of the considerable uncertainties, in particular concerning the content of a possible withdrawal agreement, candidates or tenderers, contractors or subcontractors (in the case of classified contracts) and applicants and beneficiaries (in the case of classified grant agreements) are reminded of legal repercussions, which need to be considered when the United Kingdom becomes a third country. Please note that this notice does not address: a) access to procurement by natural and legal persons established in a third country, as set out in Article 119 of Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 966/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 October 2012 on the financial rules applicable to the general budget of the Union;
and b) restrictions on access to procurement as provided for in EU legislation to protect the essential interests of the security of the EU or public security.

Negotiations are ongoing with the United Kingdom with a view to reaching a withdrawal agreement.
Furthermore, in accordance with Article 50(3) of the Treaty on European Union, the European Council, in agreement with the United Kingdom, may unanimously decide that the Treaties cease to apply at a later date.
A third country is a country not member of the EU. OJ L 298, 26.10.2012, p. 1.
Subject to any transitional arrangement that may be contained in a possible withdrawal agreement,
as of the withdrawal date, the United Kingdom's status with regard to the rules on industrial security
for procurement procedures, classified contracts and classified grant procedures/classified grant agreements with the Commission and other institutions and bodies applying Commission Decision (EU, Euratom) 2015/444 of 13 March 2015 on the security rules for protecting EU classified information changes. This has in particular the following consequences:7 8 1.
ACILITY SECURITY CLEARANCE (FSC) According to Article 44(3) of Commission Decision (EU, Euratom) 2015/444, where EU classified information has to be provided in the course of the procurement or grant award procedure, a facility security clearance is required. According to Article 44(4) of Commission Decision (EU, Euratom) 2015/444, the contracting or granting authority shall not award a classified contract or grant agreement before having received confirmation about issuance of a facility security clearance by the National Security Authority (NSA), the Designated Security Authority (DSA) or any other competent security authority of the Member State in which the contractor, subcontractor, or beneficiary is registered. As of the withdrawal date, facility security clearances issued by the United Kingdom NSA, DSA or other competent security authority are no longer valid for the purposes of Commission Decision (EU, Euratom) 2015/444. This could, under the terms of the classified contract/grant agreement that was signed, constitute a ground for termination, unless the contractor/beneficiary has taken appropriate remedial measures, such as the assignment of the contract to an economic operator or, in the case of a consortium being granted the contract, the rearrangement of action tasks within that consortium to a participant which holds, as from the withdrawal date, a facility security clearance

The arrangements contained in the draft withdrawal agreement, which includes a transition period,
agreed at negotiator's level between the EU and the UK and published on 19 March 2018, provide, in Article 122(7)(b) for specific rules on the access to certain security related sensitive information during the transition period
https://ec.europa.eu/commission/sites/beta-political/files/draft_agreement_coloured.pdf). The text of the withdrawal agreement, however, still needs to be fully agreed and ratified.
6 "Industrial security" is defined as "the application of measures to ensure the protection of EU classified information within the framework of classified contracts [or] within the framework of classified grant agreements", Article 39(1) of Commission Decision (EU, Euratom) 2015/444 of 13 March 2015 on the security rules for protecting EU classified information, OJ L 72, 17.3.2015, p. 53.
Similar rules have been adopted by other institutions and bodies, cf. in particular Council Decision 2013/488/EU of 23 September 2013 on the security rules for protecting EU classified information (OJ L 274, 15.10.2013, p. 1) and Decision of the High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy of 19 September 2017 on the security rules for the European External Action Service (OJ C 126, 10.04.2018, p. 1).
This notice does not address industrial security aspects in national procurement. For these aspects, see the "Notice to Stakeholders
Withdrawal of the United Kingdom and EU rules in the field of public procurement"
https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness_en?page=1).
issued by an EU-27 Member State; or
issued by a third country with which a security of information agreement covering industrial security aspects has been concluded, which provides for the recognition of a facility security clearance for companies registered on its territory. Where an award procedure is ongoing on the withdrawal date, tenderers or applicants that cannot comply with their security obligations will be rejected. 2.
ERSONNEL SECURITY CLEARANCE (PSC) Article 43 of Commission Decision (EU, Euratom) 2015/444 provides that classified contracts or classified grant agreements shall include provisions indicating that staff of a contractor, subcontractor or beneficiary who, for the performance of the classified contract, subcontract or grant agreement, require access to EU classified information, shall be security cleared at the relevant level by the NSA, DSA or any other competent authority of the Member State in which the contractor, subcontractor, or beneficiary is registered. According to Article 44(3) of Commission Decision (EU, Euratom) 2015/444, where EU classified information has to be provided in the course of the procurement or grant procedure, a personnel security clearance is required. As of the withdrawal date, the personnel security clearances issued by the United Kingdom NSA, DSA or other competent security authority are no longer valid for the purposes of Commission Decision (EU, Euratom) 2015/444. This could, under the terms of the classified contract/grant agreement that was signed, constitute a ground for termination, unless the contractor/ beneficiary has taken appropriate remedial measures, such as ensuring that the staff concerned holds, as from the withdrawal date, a personnel security clearance  issued by an EU-27 Member State; or  issued by a third country with which a security of information agreement covering industrial security aspects has been concluded, which provides for the recognition of a personnel security clearance. Where an award procedure is ongoing on the withdrawal date, tenderers or applicants that cannot comply with their security obligations will be rejected. 3.
UBCONTRACTS It is recalled that, according to Article 46(2) and (3) of Commission Decision (EU, Euratom) 2015/444, the contractor or beneficiary shall obtain permission from the contracting authority, before sub-contracting any parts of a classified contract or grant agreement, and shall not provide EU classified information to a sub-contractor without the prior written consent of the contracting authority. No subcontract involving access to EU classified information may be awarded to subcontractors registered in a third country, unless there is a particular regulatory framework for the
security of information. Non-compliance with this obligation could, under the terms of the classified contract/grant agreement that was signed, constitute a ground for termination, unless the contractor/beneficiary has taken appropriate remedial measures (such as ensuring that the subcontract is changed to a subcontractor with security clearance issued by an EU-27 Member State or third country with a security agreement). Where an award procedure is ongoing on the withdrawal date, tenderers or applicants with subcontracts that do not comply with the security requirements will be rejected. European Commission Directorate-General Human Resources and Security
EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL JUSTICE AND CONSUMERS
Brussels, 9 January 2018
OTICE TO STAKEHOLDER
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM FROM THE UNION AND EU RULES IN THE FIELD OF DATA PROTECTION The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. This means that unless a ratified withdrawal agreement
establishes another date, all Union primary and secondary law will cease to apply to the United Kingdom from 30 March 2019, 00:00h (CET) ('the withdrawal date').
The United Kingdom will then become a 'third country'.
In view of the considerable uncertainties, in particular concerning the content of a possible withdrawal agreement, all stakeholders processing personal data are reminded of legal repercussions, which need to be considered when the United Kingdom becomes a third country
Subject to any transitional arrangement that may be contained in a possible withdrawal agreement, as of the withdrawal date, the EU rules for transfer of personal data to third countries apply. Aside from an "adequacy decision", which allows the free flow of personal data from the EU without the EU data exporter having to implement any additional safeguards or being subject to further conditions, the EUrules (both under the current Directive 95/46 and under the new General Data Protection
which will apply as from 25 May 2018) allow a transfer if the controller or processor has provided appropriate safeguards. These safeguards may be provided for by

Negotiations are ongoing with the United Kingdom with a view to reaching a withdrawal agreement.
Furthermore, in accordance with Article 50(3) of the Treaty on European Union, the European Council, in agreement with the United Kingdom, may unanimously decide that the Treaties cease to apply at a later date.
A third country is a country not member of the EU
4
For the continued application of EU safeguards of personal data processed while the United Kingdom was a Member State, the Commission has published an essential principles paper here
https://ec.europa.eu/commission/publications/position-paper-use-data-and-protection-information-obtained-or-processed-withdrawal-date_en

Standard data protection clauses: the Commission has adopted three sets of model clauses which are available o
Binding corporate rules: legally binding data protection rules approved by the competent data protection authority which apply within a corporate group;  Approved Codes of Conduct together with binding and enforceable commitments of the controller or processor in the third country
Approved certification mechanisms together with binding and enforceable commitments of the controller or processor in the third country
In the absence of an adequacy decision or of appropriate safeguards a transfer or a set of transfers may take place on the basis of s
called
they allow transfers in specific cases, such as based on consent, for the performance of a contract, for the exercise of legal claims or for important reasons of public interest
These tools are well-known to business operators in the Member States, as they are already being used today for the transfers of personal data to non-EU countries.  The GDPR has simplified the use of these tools by cutting red tape compared to the current Directive 95/46. Transfers based on approved standard data protection clauses or on binding corporate rules will not be subject to a further, specific authorisation from a supervisory authority. In addition, the GDPR has, subject to further conditions, introduced codes of conduct and certification mechanisms as new tools for the transfer of personal data. Preparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for EU and national authorities but also for private parties. As regards the implementation of the GDPR
and in particular the new tools for transfers to third countries (e.g. approved Codes of Conduct and approved certification mechanisms entailing binding commitments by the controllers and processors receiving the data in the third country), the Commission (DG JUST) is working with interested parties and data protection authorities to make the best use of these new instruments. Moreover, the Commission has set up a stakeholder group comprised of industry, civil society and academics, in which this topic will be discussed.
European Commission
irectorate
eneral Justice and Consumers
https://ec.europa.eu/info/law/law-topic/data-protection/data-transfers-outside-eu/model-contracts-transfer-personal-data-third-countries_en
EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL JUSTICE AND CONSUMERS DIRECTORATE-GENERAL INTERNAL MARKET, INDUSTRY,  ENTREPRENEURSHIP
Brussels, 11 July 2019 REV 1
replaces the notice published on 21 November 2017
OTICE TO STAKEHOLDER
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND EU RULES ON COMPANY LAW The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union (TEU). Following
request by the United Kingdom, the European Council (Article 50) agreed on 11 April 2019
to extend further
the period provided for in Article 50(3) TEU until 31 October 2019.
This means that the United Kingdom will be, as of 1 November 2019 a third country

Preparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for EU and national authorities but also for private parties. In view of the uncertainties surrounding the ratification of the Withdrawal Agreement
all interested parties, and especially economic operators, are reminded of legal repercussions, which need to be considered when the United Kingdom becomes a third country

European Council Decision (EU) 2019/584, OJ L 101, 11.4.2019, p. 1.
Following a request by the United Kingdom, the European Council had decided a first extension on 22 March 2019 (European Council Decision (EU) 2019/476, OJ L 80 I, 22.3.2019, p. 1).
On 11 April 2019, following a second request for an extension by the United Kingdom, the European Council also decided that the decision to extend until 31 October 2019 would cease to apply on 31 May 2019 if the United Kingdom had not held elections to the European Parliament and had not ratified the Withdrawal Agreement by 22 May 2019. As the United Kingdom had not ratified the Withdrawal Agreement by 22 May 2019, it held European elections on 23 May 2019.
A third country is a country not member of the EU.
In addition, if the Withdrawal Agreement is ratified by both parties before that date, the withdrawal takes place on the first day of the month following the completion of the ratification procedures.
Agreement on the withdrawal of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland from the European Union and the European Atomic Energy Community, OJ C 144 I, 25
.2019, p. 1

Subject to the transition period provided for in the Withdrawal Agreement,
as of the withdrawal date the EU rules in the field of company law no longer apply to the United Kingdom. This has in particular the following consequences
Please note: This notice does not address

EU antitrust law and EU merger law (please note that the withdrawal of the United Kingdom has no impact on the applicability of EU antitrust rules and EU merger control rules if the jurisdictional criteria are fulfilled);

European international insolvency law.
1.
OMPANIES INCORPORATED IN THE UNITED KINGDOM The freedom of establishment, set out in Article 54 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU) ensures inter alia the recognition, throughout the Union, of a company incorporated in one Member State.  As of the withdrawal date, companies incorporated in the United Kingdom will be third country companies and therefore not automatically be recognised under Article 54 TFEU by the Member States (in accordance with the case-law of the Court of Justice). Member States will not be obliged to recognise the legal personality (and thus the limited liability
of companies, which are incorporated in the United Kingdom, but have the central administration or the principal place of business in the EU-27 Member States
UK incorporated companies may be recognised in accordance with each Member State's national law (private international law rules concerning companies and the subsequently applicable substantive company law), or international treaties. As a consequence, depending on the applicable national or international law rules, such companies might not have a legal standing in the EU and shareholders might be personally liable for the debts of the company.  Where branches of a UK incorporated company are located in EU-27 Member States, they will be branches of third country companies and accordingly the rules relevant to branches of third country companies will apply
2. EU
OMPANY LAW Directive (EU) 2017/1132 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 14 June 2017 relating to certain aspects of company law,10 provides for rules on inter alia
It is recalled that, in order for the transition period to apply, the Withdrawal Agreement has to be ratified by the EU and the United Kingdom
8
Notice to stakeholders
Withdrawal of the United Kingdom and EU competition lawhttps://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness/preparedness-notices_en).
Questions and answers related to the United Kingdom's withdrawal from the European Union in the field of civil justice and private international lawhttps://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness/preparedness-notices_en). 10
OJ L 169, 30.6.2017, p. 46

incorporation11, capital maintenance and alteration.12
Directive (EU) 2017/1132 applies to limited liability companies incorporated in accordance with national laws of the Member States. As of the withdrawal date, these rules no longer apply to the United Kingdom. Consequently, stakeholders, including employees, creditors and investors dealing with UK companies cannot rely on these EU rules. This means that, for example, EU rules on compulsory disclosure of certain company information in the business registers (such as documents and particulars related to instruments of constitution, appointment, termination of office and particulars of person
representing a company, the winding-up of a company or a change of the registered office) will no longer apply with regard to UK companies
3.
ROSS-BORDER MERGERS Directive (EU) 2017/1132 also provides for procedural rules for cross border mergers of limited liability companies. These rules apply to limited liability companies governed by national laws of the Member States and listed in Annex I to that Directive.13
As of the withdrawal date, these rules no longer apply to the United Kingdom.14 Where a cross border merger involving a company incorporated in the United Kingdom is pending on the withdrawal date, (national) rules for mergers with companies established in third countries apply to the merger as of the withdrawal date. 4. SHAREHOLDER RIGHTS AND ENGAGEMENT Directive 2007/36/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 July 2007 on the exercise of certain rights of shareholders in listed companies15 provide
for rules in relation to the exercise of certain shareholder rights, transparency obligations, and share-ownership responsibilities (i.e. monitoring of the investee company, voting, etc.). Directive 2007/36/EC applies to companies which have their registered office in a Member State and the shares of which are admitted to trading on a regulated market situated or operating within a Member State.16 As of the withdrawal date, the EU rules on shareholder rights and engagement no longer apply to companies which have their registered office in the United Kingdom or which are only listed on a stock exchange in the United Kingdom.                                                  11
Chapter II of Title I of Directive (EU) 2017/1132
12
Chapter IV of Title I of Directive (EU) 2017/1132
13
Article 87(1) of Directive (EU) 2017/1132
14
The reference, in Annex I of Directive (EU) 2017/1132, to company forms in the United Kingdom becomes obsolete. 15
OJ L 184, 14.7.2007, p. 17. 16
Article 1(1) of Directive 2007/36/EC

Commission Recommendations 2005/162/EC17 and 2004/913/EC18 address the independence of board members and the remuneration of directors
They provide for recommendations regarding the independence of board members from the company and the controlling shareholder, the creation of board committees on nomination, remuneration and audit and regarding remuneration of directors in listed companies. The recommendations apply to companies listed on EU regulated markets.19 As of the withdrawal date, these recommendations no longer apply to UK companies or to companies which are (only
listed on a UK stock exchange.  5.
AKEOVER BIDS Directive 2004/25/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 21 April 2004 on takeover bids20 sets rules for takeover bids where all or some of the securities are traded on a regulated market in one or more Member States.21 As of the withdrawal date, where the securities are traded in the United Kingdom, this Directive no longer applies. Where a takeover bid is pending on the withdrawal date, national rules for takeover bid will apply as of the withdrawal date. 6.
USINESS REGISTERS INTERCONNECTION SYSTEM (BRIS) business registers are interconnected via a European central platform22 through the business registers interconnection system (BRIS) and publicly accessible through the European e-Justice Portal.23 As of the withdrawal date, information in the United Kingdom company register is no longer exchanged via BRIS
or accessible through the European
Justice Portal.  According to Articles 36 and 37 of Directive (EU) 2017/1132, Member States business registers have to provide certain information in relation to companies in a third country (e.g. changes to the companies in a third country with a branch in EU-27; mergers involving at least one EU company and one third country company). However, this information is not exchanged with other Member States through BRIS. Thus, as of the withdrawal date, while EU-27 Member States business registers will provide some information in relation to companies in the United Kingdom, this information is not part of the information exchange through BRIS
17
Commission Recommendation 2005/162/EC of 15 February 2005 on the role of non-executive or supervisory directors of listed companies and on the committees of the (supervisory) board, OJ L 52, 25.2.2005, p. 51. 18
Commission Recommendation 2004/913/EC of 14 December 2004 fostering an appropriate regime for the remuneration of directors of listed companies, OJ L 385, 29.12.2004, p. 55
19
Section
1.1. and 2.1. of Recommendation 2005/162/EC, sections 1.1. and 2.2. of Recommendation 2004/913/EC
20
OJ L 142, 30.4.2004, p. 12
21
Article 1(1) of Directive 2004/25/EC
22
Article 22 of Directive (EU) 2017/1132
23
https://e-justice.europa.eu/content_business_registers_at_european_level-105-en.do.
5 7.
UROPEAN COMPANY FORM
The European Compan
(SE)24 has to have its registered office in the EU, in the same Member State as their head office.25 As of the withdrawal date, SEs that have their registered office in the United Kingdom no longer enjoy the status of an SE. The recognition of such companies by an EU-27 Member State would only be possible on the same basis as other UK incorporated companies (see above, section 1 of this notice).
According to Article 2 of Regulation (EC) No 2157/2001, SEs can be created by companies or other legal bodies formed in an EU Member State, with their registered and head offices within the EU
As of the withdrawal date, the UK incorporated companies will not be able to participate in the formation of an SE. SEs that have their registered office in the EU-27 at the time of withdrawal will preserve their legal status, even if they were formed, before the withdrawal date, by
UK company. The same applies with regard to subsidiary SEs.26
The European Economic Interest Grouping (EEIG)27 has to be regist
ed in an EU Member State.28 As of the withdrawal date, EEIGs registered in the United Kingdom no longer enjoy the status of an EEIG.
According to Article 4 of Regulation (EEC) No 2137/85, EEIGs can consist only of companies or other legal bodies formed in an EU Member State, with their registered or statutory office and central administration in the EU, or of natural persons carrying out services in the EU. Where UK incorporated companies or other UK legal bodies are members of an EEIG, and where natural persons carry out services only in the United Kingdom, these will cease to belong to an EEIG as of the withdrawal date
The European Cooperative Society (SCE)29 has to be set up within the territory of the EU30 and the registered office has to be in the same EU Member State as the head office.31 As of the withdrawal date, SCEs registered in the United Kingdom will no longer enjoy the status of an SCE.
Article 2 of Regulation (EC) No 1435/2003 sets out the requirement for EU                                                  24
Council Regulation (EC) No 2157/2001 of 8 October 2001 on the Statute for a European company (SE)
OJ L 294, 10.11.2001, p. 1
25
Article
of Regulation (EC) No 2157/2001
26
Article 2(3) of Regulation (EC) No 2157/2001
27
Council Regulation (EEC) No 2137/85 of 25 July 1985 on the European Economic Interest Grouping (EEIG), OJ L 199, 31.7.1985, p. 1
28
Article
of Regulation (EEC) No 2137/85
29
Council Regulation (EC) No 1435/2003 of 22 July 2003 on the Statute for a European Cooperative Society (SCE), OJ L 207, 18.8.2003, p. 1
30
Article 1(1) of Regulation (EC) No 1435/2003
31
Article 6 of Regulation (EC) No 1435/2003

residence of natural persons, and EU establishment for legal persons forming an SCE. Compliance of SCEs with these requirements has to continue following the withdrawal of the United Kingdom. Where the requirements set out in Article 2 of Regulation (EC) No 1435/2003 cease to be fulfilled as of the withdrawal date, the SCE ceases to enjoy the status of an SCE.
The website
of the Commission on company law http://ec.europa.eu/justice/civil/company-law/index_en.htm and on the European Cooperative Society (https://ec.europa.eu/growth/sectors/social-economy/cooperatives/european-cooperative-society_en) provide general information. These pages will be updated with further information, where necessary.
European Commission
irectorate
eneral Justice and Consumers
Directorate
eneral Internal Market, Industry, Entrepreneurship and SMEs
EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL JUSTICE AND CONSUMERS
Brussels, 18 January 2019 REV1  replaces the Notice to stakeholders dated 21 November 2017
OTICE TO STAKEHOLDER
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND EU RULES IN THE FIELD OF CIVIL JUSTICE AND PRIVATE INTERNATIONAL LAW The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. This means that as from 30 March 2019, 00:00h (CET)
the United Kingdom will be a third country
Preparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for EU and national authorities but also for private parties.  In view of the uncertainties surrounding the ratification of the Withdrawal Agreement, all interested parties are reminded of legal repercussions which need to be considered when the United Kingdom becomes a third country
Subject to the transition period provided for in the draft Withdrawal Agreement,
as of the withdrawal date, the EU rules in the field of civil justice and private international law no longer apply to the United Kingdom. This has in particular the following consequences:


n accordance with Article 50(3) of the Treaty on European Union, the European Council, in agreement with the United Kingdom, may unanimously decide that the Treaties cease to apply at a later date.
A third country is a country not member of the EU.
Cf. Part four of the draft Agreement on the withdrawal of the United Kingdom of Great Bri
in and Northern Ireland from the European Union and the European Atomic Energy Community, as agreed at negotiator's level on 14 November 2018 (https://ec.europa.eu/commission/publications/draft-agreement-withdrawal-uk-eu-agreed-negotiators-level-14-november-2018-including-text-article-132_en)
It is recalled that the United Kingdom does not participate in the full acquis of judicial cooperation in civil and commercial matters.
2 1.
NTERNATIONAL JURISDICTION EU private international law establishes harmonised rules for international jurisdiction in areas of civil and commercial matters, incl. insolvency, and family law.
Broadly speaking these harmonised rules apply only where a defendant is domiciled or resident in an EU Member State. 1.1. Proceedings pending on the withdrawal date For proceedings involving a defendant domiciled in the United Kingdom, and pending with a court of the EU-27 Member States
on the withdrawal date, the EU rules for international jurisdiction continue to apply
1.2. Proceedings initiated as of the withdrawal date For proceedings involving
United Kingdom domiciled defendant initiated on or after the withdrawal date in the EU-27 Member States, the rules on international jurisdiction in EU instruments in the area of civil and commercial law as well as family law no longer apply, unless the EU instruments set the rules of jurisdiction with regard to third countries.
International jurisdiction will thus be governed by the national rules of the Member State in which a court has been seized
In some instances, international conventions, such as the conventions developed by the Hague Conference on Private International Law apply8, provided that both the EU/EU Member States and the United Kingdom are parties to the convention. 2.
ECOGNITION AND ENFORCEMEN
EU private international law sets rules for the facilitated recognition and enforcement of judicial decisions issued by a Member State. 2.1. Exequatured judgements
here the relevant instrument foresees exequatur, if a judgment of a UK court has been exequatured in the EU-27 before the withdrawal date but not yet enforced before that date, the judgment can still be enforced in the EU-27,
This notice does not address specifically consumer protection issues. See, for these aspects, the "Notice to stakeholders
Withdrawal of the United Kingdom and EU rules on consumer protection and passenger rights", published on 27 February 2018.
While the EU Treaties provide for specific arrangements for the (non)participation of Ireland and Denmark in this part of the EU acquis
for the sake of simplicity, the notion "EU-27" is used.
This is, for example, the case with regard to litigation involving consumers (see footnote 5).
Usually, these conventions are transposed into national law of each State that is party to the Convention.
3 and the fact that it was originally a judgment handed down by UK courts is irrelevant. 2.2. Proceedings pending on the withdrawal date Unless a judgment of a UK court has been exequatured before the withdrawal date, the EU rules on recognition and enforcement of such judgments of UK will not apply to a judgment of a UK court that has not been enforced before the withdrawal date, even where  the judgment was handed down before the withdrawal date
or   the enforcement proceedings were commenced before the withdrawal date. 2.3. Proceedings initiated on or after the withdrawal date For proceedings to enforce a judgment of a UK court that are commenced as of the withdrawal date in the EU
7, EU rules no longer apply. Recognition and enforcement will be governed by the national rules of the Member State in which recognition/enforcement is sought. In some instances, international conventions, such as the conventions developed by the Hague Conference on Private International Law apply9, provided that both, the EU/EU Member States and the United Kingdom are parties to the convention. All stakeholders are advised to take this into consideration when assessing contractual choices of international jurisdiction  3.
PECIFIC EU PROCEDURES EU law on judicial cooperation in civil matters provides for several specific procedures, such as the European Payment Order Procedure10 or the European Procedure for Small Claims.11 The approach to jurisdiction and recognition and enforcement in sections 1 and 2 of this notice also applies for these specific judicial procedures.
Usually, these conventions are transposed into national law of each State that is party to the Convention. 10
Regulation (EC) No 1896/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 December 2006 creating a European order for payment procedure, OJ L 399, 30.12.2006, p. 1
11
Regulation (EC) No 861/2007 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 July 2007 establishing a European Small Claims Procedure
OJ L 199, 31.7.2007, p. 1

4.
UDICIAL COOPERATION PROCEDURES BETWEEN MEMBER STATES EU law on judicial cooperation in civil matters provides for facilitated judicial cooperation (e.g. in relation to the service of documents12, taking of evidence13 or within the context of the European Judicial Network in Civil and Commercial Matters14). As of the withdrawal date, EU-27 Member States
o not proceed further such pending judicial cooperation procedures involving the United Kingdom
and  do not launch new such judicial cooperation procedures involving the United Kingdom on the basis of EU law.
uch procedures may continue to be processed according to national law on judicial cooperation with third countries. In some instances, international conventions, such as the conventions developed by the Hague Conference on Private International Law apply15, provided that both, the EU/EU Member States and the United Kingdom are parties to the convention.16 All national Central Authorities are advised to assess whether judicial cooperation procedures risk being pending on the withdrawal date and whether the procedure can continue under national law or a relevant international convention. Where this continuation under national law or a relevant international convention is possible, the Central Authority should consider submitting an additional request under the relevant national law/international convention which would be conditional upon the United Kingdom withdrawing from the Union without withdrawal agreement.                                                  12
Regulation (EC) No 1393/2007 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 November 2007 on the service in the Member States of judicial and extrajudicial documents in civil or commercial matters (service of documents)
OJ L 324, 10.12.2007, p. 79
13
Council Regulation (EC) No 1206/2001 of 28 May 2001 on cooperation between the courts of the Member States in the taking of evidence in civil or commercial matters OJ L 174, 27.6.2001, p. 1
14
See Article 8 of Council Decision 2001/470/EC of 28 May 2001 establishing a European Judicial Network in civil and commercial matters OJ L 174, 27.6.2001, p. 25
15
Usually, these conventions are transposed into national law of each State that is party to the Convention. 16
For example, concerning international child abductions, the application from the requesting Central Authority can be examined by the requested Central Authority under the 1980 Hague Convention on the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction instead.
5 5.
THER ISSUES  Regulation (EU) 2016/119117 abolishes for certain public documents (for example, a birth certificate) the apostille requirement and simplifies other formalities thereby facilitating the circulation of certain public documents. The application of Regulation (EU) 2016/1191 does not depend on the date of issue of the public document but on the date when it is presented to the authorities of another Member State. Hence, Regulation (EU) 2016/1191 will no longer apply to a public document issued by the UK authorities which is presented to the authorities of a Member State of the EU-27 as from the withdrawal date, regardless of the date of issuance and the period of validity of the public document issued by the UK authorities.  The Commission provides a series of information tools on national judicial system through the e-Justice portal.18 As of the withdrawal date, the
Justice Portal will no longer provide information related to the United Kingdom, including the dynamic forms and the UK factsheets.  The European e-Justice Portal https://beta.e-justice.europa.eu/?action=home&plang=e
and the website of the Commission on civil justice http://ec.europa.eu/justice/civil/index_en.htm provide for information concerning the field of civil justice. These pages will be updated with further information, where necessary.
European Commission
irectorate
eneral Justice and Consumers
17
Regulation (EU) 2016/1191 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 6 July 2016 on promoting the free movement of citizens by simplifying the requirements for presenting certain public documents in the European Union, OJ L 200, 26.7.2016, p. 1. 18
https://e-justice.europa.eu/home.do?action=home&plang=en

EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL JUSTICE AND CONSUMERS
Brussels, 11 April 2019
UESTIONS AND ANSWERS RELATED TO THE UNITED KINGDOM'S WITHDRAWAL FROM THE EUROPEAN UNION IN THE FIELD OF CIVIL JUSTICE AND PRIVATE INTERNATIONAL LAW On 18 January 2019, the European Commission services published an updated "Notice to stakeholders  withdrawal of the United Kingdom and EU rules in the field of civil justice and private international law
the Brexit preparedness notice

This list of Questions and Answers (Q&A) gives further guidance on the basis of the Brexit preparedness notice in a situation where the United Kingdom (UK) becomes a third country on the withdrawal date' without a ratified withdrawal agreement and without the transition period provided for in the Withdrawal Agreement.  The withdrawal date is 1 November 2019.
This Q&A may be further updated and complemented where necessary. 1.
URISDICTION
Can a
UK insurer be sued in the EU-27
as from the withdrawal 1.1.date?  Proceedings initiated as from the withdrawal date in the EU-27 Member States
https://ec.europa.eu/info/files/civil-justice
2
It is recalled that the United Kingdom does not participate in the full acquis of judicial cooperation in civil and commercial matters.
The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. After a first extension decided on 22 March 2019, the European Council (Article 50) decided on 11 April 2019, in agreement with the United Kingdom, to further extend the 2-year period provided for in Article 50(3) of the Treaty on European Union until 31 October 2019.
However, in the event that the United Kingdom does not hold elections to the European Parliament and has not ratified the Withdrawal Agreement by 22 May 2019, the withdrawal date is 1 June 2019
4
While the EU Treaties provide for specific arrangements for the (non)participation of Ireland and Denmark in this part of the EU acquis
for the sake of simplicity, the notion "EU-27" is used.
2 Article 11 of Regulation (EU) No 1215/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 December 2012 on jurisdiction and the recognition and enforcement of judgments in civil and commercial matters
sets out the rules for international jurisdiction in matters relating to insurance. These rules establish jurisdiction of EU courts where the insurer is domiciled in a Member State.
This means that as of the withdrawal date
the possibility to sue the UK insurer in the court of an EU Member State depend
on national law of that EU Member State.  Proceedings pending on the withdrawal date in the EU-27 Member States For issues of international jurisdiction in proceedings pending on the withdrawal date, please refer to the Brexit preparedness notice.
Will Regulation (EU) No 1215/2012 continue to apply to consumer 1.2.contracts as from the withdrawal date
Proceedings initiated as from the withdrawal date in the EU-27 Member States Notice to stakeholders
Withdrawal of the United Kingdom and EU rules on consumer protection and passenger rights.
Proceedings pending on the withdrawal date in the EU-27 Member States For issues of international jurisdiction in proceedings pending on the withdrawal date, please refer to the Brexit preparedness notice.
How will the lis pendens rule apply? 1.3.As of the withdrawal date, the obligation for a court in an EU-27 Member State set out in Article 29(1) of Regulation (EU) No 1215/2012 no longer applies with regard to courts seized in the United Kingdom.  However, Article 33 of Regulation (EU) No 1215/2012 becomes applicable with regard to courts first seized in the United Kingdom

OJ L 351, 20.12.2012, p. 1
6
According to Article 11(2) of Regulation (EU) No 1215/2012, an insurer who is not domiciled in a Member State but has a branch
agency or other establishment in a Member State shall be deemed to be domiciled in that Member State in disputes arising out of that branch
7
https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/file_import/consumer_protection_and_passenger_rights_en.pdf

2.
PPLICABLE LAW
What will be the law applicable to consumer contracts as from the 2.1.withdrawal date? Article 6 of Regulation (EC) No 593/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 17 June 2008 on the law applicable to contractual obligations (Rome I)
ensures that, irrespective of the law chosen by the parties or which applies by default, consumers with a habitual place of residence in a
EU Member State enjoy the mandatory protection of that law if they are targeted there by third country traders. As of the withdrawal date, this will apply also in relation to UK traders.
3.
ECOGNITION AND ENFORCEMENT
Can a UK judgment still be recognised and enforced under EU rules 3.1.as of the withdrawal date?  This matter is addressed in the Brexit preparedness notice:
he EU rules on recognition and enforcement will not apply to a judgment of a UK court, even where the judgment was handed down before the withdrawal date or the enforcement proceedings were commenced before the withdrawal date
The only exception to this rule is if a judgment of a UK court has been exequatured before the withdrawal date. The reason for this is that such a judgment has already been declared enforceable in a specific EU Member State by the courts of that Member State before the withdrawal date. Thus, the fact that the judgment was originally handed down by a UK court has become irrelevant. This exception applies also to authentic instruments and agreements, which have been declared enforceable in an EU-27 Member State before the withdrawal date.
What if a certificate has been issued under Regulation (EU) No 3.2.1215/2012 before the withdrawal date?  The rule set out in section 3.1. of this Q&A document
i.e. that enforcement under EU law stops
also applies to
he issuance of a certificate in the Member State of origin in accordance with Article 53 of Regulation (EU) No 1215/2012.  The issuance of such a certificate in the Member State of origin cannot be compared to a declaration of enforceability ('exequatur') in the Member State of enforcement prior to the withdrawal date. The Member State can decide under national law to continue to apply essentially the same rules as the current ones to a UK judgment for which a
OJ L 177, 4.7.2008, p. 6
9
See also the Notice to stakeholders
Withdrawal of the United Kingdom and EU rules on consumer protection and passenger rights. https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/file_import/consumer_protection_and_passenger_rights_en.pdf

certificate under Regulation (EU) No 1215/2012 has been issued before the withdrawal date.
What about recognition and enforcement of a UK judgment given by 3.3.a court designated in a choice of court agreement?
Proceedings initiated as from the withdrawal date in the EU Member States On 28 December 2018 the United Kingdom signed and ratified the 2005 Hague Convention on Choice of Court Agreements.10 It will apply to the United Kingdom when the United Kingdom withdraws from the EU without a withdrawal agreement.  However, according to Article 16(1) of the Convention, it will only apply to exclusive choice of court agreements concluded after its entry into force for the United Kingdom, i.e. after the United Kingdom has become party to the Convention.11
Proceedings pending on the withdrawal date in the EU Member States For issues of proceedings pending on the withdrawal date, please refer to the Brexit preparedness notice.
What about recognition of a UK divorce judgment? 3.4.UK divorce judgment handed down before the withdrawal date, but not subject to a recognition proceeding under Article 21(3) of Council Regulation (EC) No 2201/2003 of 27 November 2003 concerning jurisdiction and the recognition and enforcement of judgments in matrimonial matters and the matters of parental responsibility.12 A divorce judgment, which has already taken effect before the withdrawal date
will not lose its validity as from the withdrawal date. Such a judgment changes the status of the spouses from married to divorced, which is presumed to be the same in all EU-27 Member States. If the change of status occurred before the withdrawal date, it remains valid in all EU-27 Member States unless and until there is a court decision on non-recognition. The fact that the legal regime subsequently changes will not deprive such a status decision of its effect. However, if a divorce judgment is challenged in the EU as from the withdrawal date, EU rules on grounds of non-recognition of a divorce judgment will no longer apply, but grounds of non-recognition are subject to national law.                                                  10
https://www.hcch.net/en/instruments/conventions/full-text/?cid=98.  11
Initial date of accession signalled by the United Kingdom was 1 April 2019, but the United Kingdom has currently postponed it to either 13 April or 23 May 2019 depending on scenarios, see also footnote 3.
12
OJ L 338, 23.12.2003, p. 1.
5 Proceedings initiated as from the withdrawal date in the EU-27 Member States The 1970 Hague Convention on the recognition of divorces and legal separations13 deals with the matter at the international level. The United Kingdom is party to this Convention, but currently only 12 EU-27 Member States are contracting parties. Any EU Member State intending to join the Convention would need an EU authorisation to do so.  Proceedings pending on the withdrawal date in the EU-27 Member States For issues of proceedings pending on the withdrawal date, please refer to the Brexit preparedness notice.
What about recognition and enforcement of a UK maintenance 3.5.decision? Proceedings initiated as from the withdrawal date in the EU-27 Member States The 2007 Hague Convention on the International Recovery of Child Support and other Forms of Family Maintenance14
deals with the matter at the international level. On 28 December 2018 the United Kingdom signed and ratified this Convention. It will apply to the United Kingdom when the United Kingdom withdraws from the EU without a withdrawal agreement. However, according to Article 56(1) of the Convention, it will only apply to requests and applications made after the United Kingdom has become party to the Convention.15 Proceedings pending on the withdrawal date in the EU-27 Member States For issues of proceedings pending on the withdrawal date, please refer to the Brexit preparedness notice: For proceedings conducted before the courts of the EU Member States on the withdrawal date and involving a party domiciled in the United Kingdom
the provisions on recognition and enforcement under the EU law cease to apply as from the withdrawal date. These specific provisions are applicable only in cross-border cases as defined in the Regulation, i.e. where the recognition or enforcement of a maintenance decision originating from one Member State is sought in another Member State. As from the withdrawal date, this requirement will no longer be met for parties with domicile or habitual residence in the United Kingdom. It will then be for the EU-27 Member States to decide how to deal with the case in the procedural terms: whether they will continue in accordance with the national                                                  13
https://www.hcch.net/en/instruments/conventions/full-text/?cid=80
14
https://www.hcch.net/en/instruments/conventions/full-text/?cid=131.  15
Initial date of accession signalled by the United Kingdom was 1 April 2019, but the United Kingdom has currently postponed it to either 13 April or 23 May 2019 depending on scenarios, see also footnote

6 procedural law or whether they will discontinue proceedings and require the claimants to re-initiate them under national procedural law. The Regulations do not provide for a unified solution for such cases. 4.
NSOLVENCY
What about insolvency proceedings opened in an EU-27 Member 4.1.State?  Main or secondary proceedings opened as from the withdrawal date in the EU-27 Member States As from the withdrawal date, the United Kingdom can no longer open proceedings on the basis of Regulation (EU) 2015/848
EU-27 Member States continue to apply Regulation (EU) 2015/848, taking account of the United Kingdom as a third country to which Regulation (EU) 2015/848 does not apply. Main or secondary proceedings pending on the withdrawal date in an EU-27 Member State Section 1. of the Brexit preparedness notice also applies to insolvency proceedings. The EU rules on jurisdiction continue to apply. Where prior to the withdrawal date main proceedings were opened in the United Kingdom and secondary proceedings were opened in EU-27 Member State(s)
the courts of Member State(s) in question retain international jurisdiction according to Regulation (EU) 2015/848 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 20 May 2015 on insolvency proceedings.16
What happens in case of insolvency proceedings opened in the 4.2.United Kingdom before the withdrawal date?  Section 2. of the Brexit preparedness notice also applies to insolvency proceedings:
nsolvency proceedings
which commenced in the United Kingdom and are pending on the withdrawal date are no longer recognised by EU-27 Member States under Regulation (EU) 2015/848 as of the withdrawal date.                                                   16
OJ L 141, 5.6.2015, p. 19

5.
THER ISSUES
What happens to specific European procedures
European Payment 5.1.Order Procedure17 or the European Procedure for Small Claims18
Sections 1.  and 2. of the Brexit preparedness notice also apply to the specific European procedures. Procedures initiated as from the withdrawal date in the EU-27 Member States For procedures involving a UK domiciled defendant initiated on or after the withdrawal date in the EU Member States, the EU-specific procedures will no longer be available
Procedures pending on the withdrawal date in the EU-27 Member States The European Payment Order Procedure and the European Procedure for Small Claims are available only in cross-border cases as defined in the relevant Regulations, i.e. where at least one party has a domicile or habitual residence in a Member State other than the one of the court seized.19 Procedures conducted before the courts of the EU-27 Member States on the withdrawal date and involving a party domiciled in the United Kingdom cease under the EU law as from the withdrawal date. It is for each EU-27 Member State to decide whether, on the basis of national procedural law
The pending procedure is continued. Nothing in EU law prevents this.
The procedure is discontinued, i.e. the claimant to re-initiate them under national procedural law.
Is there any alternative concerning
egal aid in cross-border disputes 5.2.as of the withdrawal date
As of the withdrawal date
Council Directive 2003/8/EC of 27 January 2003 to improve access to justice in cross-border disputes by establishing minimum common rules relating to legal aid for such disputes20 no longer applies in EU-27 Member States vis
-vis the United Kingdom
There is no instrument under international law that would deal with this matter. As from the withdrawal date, national law applies to legal aid in cross-border disputes.                                                         17
Regulation (EC) No 1896/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 December 2006 creating a European order for payment procedure
OJ L 399, 30.12.2006, p. 1
18
Regulation (EC) No 861/2007 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 July 2007 establishing a European Small Claims Procedure, OJ L 199, 31.7.2007, p. 1. 19
Article 3(1) of Regulation (EC) No 1896/2006 and Article 3(1) of Regulation (EC) No 861/2007
20
OJ L 26, 31.1.2003, p. 41.
8
In the field of public documents, can an apostille be required again 5.3.as from the withdrawal date for documents issued by the UK
See Section 5. of the Brexit preparedness notice.  As from the withdrawal date, EU-27 entitled to require an apostille under the 1961 Hague Apostille Convention21 and apply their national law regarding translations to any public document issued by the UK authorities presented to them as of the withdrawal date.  oOo
21
https://www.hcch.net/en/instruments/conventions/full-text/?cid=41.
EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL JUSTICE AND CONSUMERS DIRECTORATE-GENERAL FOR MOBILITY AND TRANSPORT
Brussels, 27 February 2018 Rev1
OTICE TO STAKEHOLDER
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND EU
ULES ON CONSUMER PROTECTION AND PASSENGER RIGHTS The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. This means that
unless a ratified withdrawal agreement
establishes another date, all Union primary and secondary law will cease to apply to the United Kingdom from 30 March 2019, 00:00h (CET) ('the withdrawal date').
The United Kingdom will then become a 'third country'.
Preparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for EU and national authorities but also for private parties.  In view of the considerable uncertainties, in particular concerning the content of a possible withdrawal agreement, stakeholders concerned are reminded of legal repercussions, which need to be considered when the United Kingdom becomes a third country
Subject to any transitional arrangement that may be contained in a possible withdrawal agreement, as of the withdrawal date, the general EU rules in the field of consumer law (such as the Unfair Commercial Practices Directive4, the Consumer Rights Directive5, the
Negotiations are ongoing with the United Kingdom with a view to reaching a withdrawal agreement.
Furthermore, in accordance with Article 50(3) of the Treaty on European Union, the European Council, in agreement with the United Kingdom, may unanimously decide that the Treaties cease to apply at a later date.
A third country is a country not member of the EU.
Directive 2005/29/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 May 2005 concerning unfair business-to-consumer commercial practices in the internal market and amending Council Directive 84/450/EEC, Directives 97/7/EC, 98/27/EC and 2002/65/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council and Regulation (EC) No 2006/2004 of the European Parliament and of the Council ), OJ L 149, 11.6.2005, p. 22.
Directive 2011/83/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 October 2011 on consumer rights, amending Council Directive 93/13/EEC and Directive 1999/44/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council and repealing Council Directive 85/577/EEC and Directive 97/7/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council, OJ L 304, 22.11.2011, p. 64.
2 Unfair Contract Terms Directive6, the Consumer Sales and Guarantees Directive7, the Package Travel Directive
- see section
1 and 2 below) and the EU passenger right
legislation (see section
below) no longer apply to the United Kingdom.
This has in particular the following consequences: 1.
URCHASE BY CONSUMERS IN THE EU OF PRODUCTS OR SERVICES FROM TRADERS ESTABLISHED IN THE UNITED KINGDOM10 On or after the withdrawal date, consumers in the EU might purchase products or services from traders established in the United Kingdom. According to EU law, where a consumer concludes a contract with a professional in another country who, by any means, direct
his commercial activities to the consumer's country of residence, the contract is generally governed by the law of the country where the consumer has his or her habitual residence. It is possible to choose another law but that choice cannot deprive the consumer of the protection afforded by the law of the habitual residence which cannot be derogated from by agreement under that law.11 On that basis EU courts will continue to apply the EU rules on consumer protection even though the trader is in the United Kingdom. This includes in particular the rules set out in:
he Unfair Commercial Practices Directive;12  the Consumer Rights Directive;13
Council Directive 93/13/EEC of 5 April 1993 on unfair terms in consumer contracts, OJ L 95, 21.4.1993, p. 29
7
Directive 1999/44/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 May 1999 on certain aspects of the sale of consumer goods and associated guarantees, OJ L 171, 7.7.1999, p. 12
8
Directive (EU) 2015/2302 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 November 2015 on package travel and linked travel arrangements, OJ L 326, 11.12.2015, p. 1
9
This notice does not address the specific EU rules on e-commerce, and in particular, the Directive 2000/31/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 8 June 2000 on certain legal aspects of information society services, in particular electronic commerce, in the Internal Market ('Directive on electronic commerce') OJ L 178, 17.7.2000, p. 1. 10
This notice does not address other practical aspects of cross-border purchase in third countries, such as EU rules related to value added tax, customs, and restrictions of importation.  11
Article 6(1) of Regulation (EC) No 593/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 17 June 2008 on the law applicable to contractual obligations (Rome I), OJ L 177, 4.7.2008, p. 6. For exceptions to this general rule, see Article 6(2)-(4) of Regulation (EC) No 593/2008. 12
Directive 2005/29/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 May 2005 concerning unfair business-to-consumer commercial practices in the internal market and amending Council Directive 84/450/EEC, Directives 97/7/EC, 98/27/EC and 2002/65/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council and Regulation (EC) No 2006/2004 of the European Parliament and of the Council (Unfair Commercial Practices Directive), OJ L 149, 11.6.2005, p. 22. 13
Directive 2011/83/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 October 2011 on consumer rights, OJ L 304, 22.11.2011, p. 64.
3  the Unfair Contract Terms Directive;14  the Consumer Sales and Guarantees Directive;15  the Price Indication Directive16 and  the Package Travel Directive.17 If a EU-27 consumer were to bring an individual legal action18 before a court of the EU-27 against a trader domiciled in the United Kingdom, the withdrawal has no implications for establishing international jurisdiction where the trader has directed his activities to the Member State of the consumer's domicile19; in these cases the EU jurisdictional rules which allow the consumer to sue the trader in the EU-27 Member State where the consumer is domiciled apply, irrespective of whether the trader is domiciled in the EU or in a third country.20 However, the recognition and enforcement of an EU judgement in the United Kingdom and vice versa will be governed, as of the withdrawal date by national rules in the EU-27 and in the United Kingdom.21 As of the withdrawal date, EU law ensuring the availability of out
f-court dispute resolution22 and facilitating access to online dispute resolution23 no longer applies to                                                  14
Council Directive 93/13/EEC of 5 April 1993 on unfair terms in consumer contracts, OJ L 95, 21.4.1993, p. 29. 15
Directive 1999/44/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 May 1999 on certain aspects of the sale of consumer goods and associated guarantees, OJ L 171, 7.7.1999, p. 12
16
Directive 98/6/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 February 1998 on consumer protection in the indication of prices of products offered to consumers, OJ L 80, 18.3.1998, p. 27. 17
Directive (EU) 2015/2302 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 November 2015 on package travel and linked travel arrangements, OJ L 326, 11.12.2015, p.
. 18
While cross-border litigation by consumers is relatively rare, this aspect is addressed here to provide a complete overview
19
Consumer contracts covered in Article 17(1)(a)-(c) of Regulation (EU) No 1215/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 December 2012 on jurisdiction and the recognition and enforcement of judgments in civil and commercial matters, OJ L 351, 20.12.2012, p. 1. 20
Article 18(1) of Regulation (EU) No 1215/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 December 2012 on jurisdiction and the recognition and enforcement of judgments in civil and commercial matters, OJ L 351, 20.12.2012, p. 1. 21
For procedures and proceedings pending on the withdrawal date, the EU is trying to agree solutions for some of the situations that might arise. The relevant essential principles of the EU position in the field of judicial cooperation in civil and commercial matters have been published here: https://ec.europa.eu/commission/publications/position-paper-judicial-cooperation-civil-and-commercial-matters_en. 22
Directive 2013/11/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 21 May 2013 on alternative dispute resolution for consumer disputes (Directive on consumer ADR), OJ L 165, 18.6.2013, p. 63. 23
Regulation (EU) No 524/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 21 May 2013 on online dispute resolution for consumer disputes (Regulation on consumer ODR)
OJ L 165, 18.6.2013, p. 1.
4 the United Kingdom and the EU online dispute resolution platform is no longer available in relation to traders established in the United Kingdom. Concerning public enforcement (e.g. to achieve the cessation of a commercial practice) the Regulation (EC) No 2006/2004 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 October 2004 on cooperation between national authorities responsible for the enforcement of consumer protection laws (the Regulation on consumer protection cooperation)24 no longer applies to the United Kingdom. This means that, as from the withdrawal date, United Kingdom authorities will not be obliged under EU law to cooperate in the case of cross-border claims.  In addition, as of the withdrawal date
EU law giving to certain "qualified entities", designated by EU Member States, legal standing for bringing injunction actions in another Member State no longer applies to the United Kingdom.25 2.
NSOLVENCY PROTECTION OF TRAVELLERS (PACKAGE TRAVEL
According to EU law, package travel organisers established in the
are obliged to provide securities for the refund and for the traveller's repatriation in case of the organiser's insolvency.26 Organisers not established in the EU which sell or offer travel packages to consumers in the EU, or which by any means direct such activities to the EU
also must provide such insolvency protection in each of the Member State
they are selling to.27 However, where an organiser established in a third country does not offer travel package
to consumers in the EU and does not direct its selling activities to the EU (passive sales), EU law providing mandatory insolvency protection does not appl
This means that in such cases insolvency protection granted by EU law will not apply to insolvencies of organisers established in the United Kingdom occurring as of the withdrawal date.

s of the withdrawal date, EU law providing for the mutual recognition of insolvency protection taken out in accordance with the requirements of the home country of an organiser no longer applies with regard to insolvency protection taken out in accordance with requirements applicable in the United Kingdom.28 This means that, as of the withdrawal date, insolvency protection taken out in the United Kingdom no longer serves to comply with the requirements for insolvency protection of package travel organisers in accordance with Article 17 of Directive (EU) 2015/2302.                                                  24
OJ L 364, 9.12.2004, p. 1
25
Article 4 of Directive 2009/22/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 April 2009 on injunctions for the protection of consumers' interests, OJ L 110, 1.5.2009, p. 30
26
See first sub-paragraph of Article 17(1) of Directive (EU) 2015/2302. 27
See second sub-paragraph of Article 17(1) of Directive (EU) 2015/2302. 28
Article 18(1) of Directive (EU) 2015/2302.
5 3. EU PASSENGER RIGHTS  Air passengers: As of the withdrawal date, EU law on air passenger rights29 no longer applies to passengers departing from an airport located in the United Kingdom to an airport situated in the territory of a EU-27 Member State, unless the operating air carrier of the flight concerned is a Union carrier, i.e. has an operating licence granted by an EU-27 Member State. This means that, despite the withdrawal of the United Kingdom from the EU
air passenger rights granted by EU law continue to apply to passengers departing from the United Kingdom to an airport situated in the territory of an EU-27 Member State with a Community carrier. However, air passenger rights granted by EU law do not apply to flights departing as of the withdrawal date from the United Kingdom to the EU-27 with non-Community carriers
EU law granting specific rights for disabled persons and persons with reduced mobility travelling by air30 will no longer apply to disabled persons and persons with reduced mobility using commercial passenger air services who, as of the withdrawal date, depart from, transit through, or arrive at an airport in the United Kingdom. However, certain rights, such as assistance by air carriers, continue to apply to air passengers departing from an UK airport to an EU-27 airport if the operating carrier is a Community air carrier.31
Ship passengers: EU law on ship passenger rights32 continues to apply on and after the withdrawal date to passengers where the port of embarkation is in the EU-2733 or in the United Kingdom, provided that the port of disembarkation is in the EU-27 and the service is operated by a carrier established within the territory of a Member State or offering passenger transport services to or from a Member State ("Union carrier").34
Bus and coach passengers: EU law on rights of passengers in bus and coach transport35 continues to apply on and after the withdrawal date to passengers                                                  29
Regulation (EC) No 261/2004 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 February 2004 establishing common rules on compensation and assistance to passengers in the event of denied boarding and of cancellation or long delay of flights, OJ L 46, 17.2.2004, p. 1. 30
Regulation (EC) No 1107/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 5 July 2006 concerning the rights of disabled persons and persons with reduced mobility when travelling by air OJ L 204, 26.7.2006, p. 1. 31
Article 1(3) of Regulation (EC) No 1107/2006. 32
Regulation (EU) No 1177/2010 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 November 2010 concerning the rights of passengers when travelling by sea and inland waterway, OJ L 334, 17.12.2010, p. 1. 33
Article 2(1)(a) of Regulation (EU) No 1177/2010. 34
Article 2(1)(b) and 3(e) of Regulation (EU) No 1177/2010. Specific rules apply to cruise passengers, see Article 2(1)(c) of Regulation (EU) No 1177/2010
35
Regulation (EU) No 181/2011 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 February 2011 concerning the rights of passengers in bus and coach transport, OJ L 55, 28.2.2011, p. 1.
6 travelling with regular services36 to or from the United Kingdom where the boarding or the alighting point of the passenger is situated in the EU-27, and the scheduled distance of the service is 250km or more.37
Rail passengers: EU law on rail passengers' rights38 continues to apply on and after the withdrawal date to rail passenger services in the territory of the Union,39 provided that the railway undertaking is licensed in accordance with Article 17 of Directive 2012/34/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 21 November 2012 establishing a single European railway area.40
The website
of the Commission on consumer protection (https://europa.eu/youreurope/citizens/consumers/) and passenger rights
https://europa.eu/youreurope/citizens/travel/passenger-rights/index_en.htm) provide general information. These pages will be updated with further information, where necessary.
European Commission Directorate-General Justice and Consumers
Directorate
eneral for Mobility and Transport
36
Specific rules apply to passengers travelling with occasional services, see Article 2(3) of Regulation (EU) No 181/2011
37
Article 2(1) of Regulation (EU) No 181/2011
38
Regulation (EC) No 1371/2007 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 October 2007 on ions OJ L 315, 3.12.2007, p. 14. 39
Article 2(1) of Regulation (EC) No 1371/2007. 40
OJ L 343, 14.12.2012, p. 32
EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL FOR MARITIME AFFAIRS AND FISHERIES
Brussels, 9 April 2018
OTICE TO STAKEHOLDER
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND EU RULES ON FISHERIES AND AQUACULTURE The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. This means that, unless a ratified withdrawal agreement
establishes another date, all Union primary and secondary law will cease to apply to the United Kingdom from 30 March 2019, 00:00h (CET) ('the withdrawal date').
The United Kingdom will then become a 'third country'.
Preparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for EU and national authorities but also for private parties.  In view of the considerable uncertainties, in particular concerning the content of a possible withdrawal agreement, operators carrying out fishing activities and any of the activities related to any stage of production, processing, marketing, distribution and retail chains of fishery and aquaculture products are reminded of legal repercussions, which need to be considered when the United Kingdom becomes a third country. Subject to any transitional arrangement that may be contained in a possible withdrawal agreement, as of the withdrawal date, the Common fisheries policy rules no longer apply to the United Kingdom. This has in particular the following consequences:
1.
ONTROL AND ENFORCEMENT In accordance with international law of the sea, fishing vessels wishing to engage in fishing activities in waters under the sovereignty or jurisdiction of a third country are
Negotiations are ongoing with the United Kingdom with a view to reaching a withdrawal agreement.
Furthermore, in accordance with Article 50(3) of the Treaty on European Union, the European Council, in agreement with the United Kingdom, may unanimously decide that the Treaties cease to apply at a later date.
A third country is a country not member of the EU.
This notice does not address aspects related to maritime transport, including safety of fishing vessels (see, for these aspects, the "Notice to stakeholders
Withdrawal of the United Kingdom and EU rules in the field of maritime transport"), seafarer qualifications (see, for these aspects
the "Notice to stakeholders
Withdrawal of the United Kingdom and EU rules on the minimum level of training of seafarers and the mutual recognition of seafarers' certificates"), and marine equipment (see, for these aspects, the "Notice to stakeholders
Withdrawal of the United Kingdom and EU rules in the field of industrial products
(https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness_en).
required to obtain a fishing authorisation from that third country. In addition, fishing vessels performing fishing activities in third country waters are subject to applicable laws and regulations of the concerned coastal state and hence may undergo control and enforcement activities carried out by the authorities of the coastal state concerned. The flag State is responsible for diligently monitoring, including through authorisation schemes, the activities of vessels flying its flag when operating in third country waters, to ensure that such activities do not undermine the sustainability of the stocks in the coastal state's waters and are consistent with applicable conservation rules of the coastal state. Against this background,
ccess by Union vessels to third country waters under direct authorisations
granted by the third country authorities
fall under the authorisation procedure foreseen by Regulation (EU) 2017/2403 on the sustainable management of external fishing fleets
In this framework, provided that all criteria and conditions foreseen in Articles 4 to 7 of Regulation (EU) 2017/2403
re complied with, EU Member States may authorise their vessels to fish under such direct authorisations in accordance with the procedure set out in Articles 16 to 18 of Regulation (EU) 2017/2403. This procedure requires the prior notification of the Commission and gives the Commission the possibility to object to the granting of the fishing authorisation in accordance with Article 18 of Regulation (EU) 2017/2403 if the conditions set out therein are not complied with.
As of the withdrawal date, these rules will apply to Union fishing vessels wishing to engage in fishing activities in waters of the United Kingdom. Access by third country vessels to Union waters is subject to the authorisation procedure foreseen in Title III of Regulation (EU) 2017/2403. In this regard, third country vessels may only engage in fishing activities in Union waters if in possession of an authorisation issued by the European Commission in accordance with Articles 32 to 34 of Regulation (EU) 2017/2403 and provided they comply with the other requirements in that Title, notably Article 38 of Council Regulation (EU) 2017/2403, which sets the rules on control and enforcement measures for fishing activities within Union waters of fishing vessels flying the flag of a third country.
As of the withdrawal date, these rules will apply to United Kingdom fishing vessels wishing to engage in fishing activities in Union waters
2.
ANDINGS AND FIRST SALE OF FISHERY PRODUCTS Access to ports of third countries, including port services and first-stage marketing installations, and the landing of catches in such ports by vessels flying the flag of an EU Member State are subject to the rules in the third country. As of the withdrawal date, Union vessels wishing to land in the United Kingdom will be subject to the rules applicable in the United Kingdom

Council Regulation (EU) 2017/2403 of the European Parliament and of the Coun
l of 12 December 2017 on the sustainable management of external fishing fleets, OJ L 347, 28.12.2017, p. 81.
Pursuant to Article 2 of Regulation No 1005/2008
or intended for use for the purposes of commercial exploitation of fishery resources, including support ships, fish processing vessels, vessels engaged in transhipment and carrier vessels equipped for the transportation of fishery products, except container vessels.
Access to ports of EU Member States, including port services and the use of first-stage marketing installations, as well as the conduct of landing and transhipment operations in such ports shall be prohibited for vessels flying the flag of a third country unless they meet the requirements laid down in Section I of Chapter II of Regulation (EC) No 1005/2008. As of the withdrawal date, these rules will appl
to United Kingdo
vessels wishing to land in the Union
The above is without prejudice to rules of international law of the sea applicable in cases of force majeure and distress. 3.
MPORT AND EXPORT OF FISHERY AND AQUACULTURE PRODUCTS 3.1. Flag State notification and catch certification According to Article 20(1) of Regulation (EC) No 1005/2008, in order to export fishery products caught by third country flagged fishing vessels
to the EU, the Commission has to have received a notification from the flag State. As of the withdrawal date, this applies to the United Kingdom.  Fishery products
may only be imported to the EU when accompanied by a catch certificate (Article 12(2) of Regulation (EC) No 1005/2008). The catch certificate to be validated by the United Kingdom must certify that the catches concerned have been made in accordance with applicable laws, regulations and international conservation and management measures. The catch certificate must have been validated by the United Kingdom competent authority and, when required, accompanied by other documents envisaged by the certification scheme in the event of an indirect import after transhipment, transit or processing of the products in another third country (Article
14 and 19 of Regulation (EC) No 1005/2008). Export of catches made by Union fishing vessels to the United Kingdom will also be subject to the catch certification scheme if the United Kingdom certifies to the European Commission by way of notification that it has in place relevant implementation, control and enforcement arrangements and public authorities empowered to verify certificates (Article
15 and 20 of Regulation (EC) No 1005/2008).  3.2. Consumer information, labelling, and marketing requirements Fishery and aquaculture products placed on the EU market are subject to specific market requirements set out in Regulation (EU) No 1379/2013
which include the specific consumer information requirements (Chapter IV of Regulation (EU) No 1379/2013
and marketing standards on fishery and aquaculture products (Chapter III of Regulation (EU)
Council Regulation (EC) No 1005/2008 of 29 September 2008 establishing a Community system to prevent, deter and eliminate illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing, OJ L 286, 29.10.2008, p.
3
Chapter 03 and Tariff headings 1604 and 1605 of the Combined Nomenclature established by Council Regulation (EEC) No 2658/87 of 23 July 1987 on the tariff and statistical nomenclature and on the Common Customs Tariff, with the exception of the products listed in Annex I of this Regulation.
Regulation (EU) No 1379/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 December 2013 on the common organisation of the markets in fishery and aquaculture products, OJ L 354, 28.12.2013, p. 1.
4 No 1379/2013). The rules include also the prohibition to sell fish below the minimum conservation reference size for direct human consumption.  Apart from these sector-specific requirements on the import and export of fishery and aquaculture products
the horizontal requirements in EU food law apply.10 These rules, be they sector-specific or horizontal, apply to all food placed on the EU market, independently of the place of production of the food.  As regards organic aquaculture, for products placed on the EU-27 market as of the withdrawal date, the certificates issued by control authorities and bodies in the United Kingdom are no longer valid.11 4. PROFESSIONAL ORGANISATIONS Fishery and aquaculture producer organisations established pursuant to Article
of Regulation (EU) No 1379/2013 and inter-branch organisations established pursuant to Article 11 of the same Regulation may only function within the Union and fulfil the tasks stipulated by Union law if recognised by Member State
in accordance with Section II of Chapter II of that Regulation. As of the withdrawal date, producer organisations and inter-branch organisations recognised in the United Kingdom on the basis of Regulation (EU) No 1379/2013 will no longer be considered professional organisations under EU law.
European Commission
Directorate-General for Maritime Affairs and Fisheries                                                  10
See "Notice to stakeholders  Withdrawal of the United Kingdom and EU rules on food law" (https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness_en).  11
For details, see "Notice to stakeholders  Withdrawal of the United Kingdom and EU rules on food law" (https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness_en).
EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL FOR MARITIME AFFAIRS AND FISHERIES
Brussels, 18 July 2019
UESTIONS AND ANSWERS RELATED TO THE UNITED KINGDOM'S WITHDRAWAL FROM THE EUROPEAN UNION WITH REGARD TO FISHERIES
On 9 April 2018, the European Commission services published the "Notice to stakeholders  withdrawal of the United Kingdom and EU rules in the field of fisheries and aquaculture
On 28 March 2019, the European Parliament and the Council of the European Union adopted Regulation (EU) 2019/497
and Regulation (EU) 2019/498
which provide for contingency measures on fisheries with regard to the withdrawal of the United Kingdom from the Union.
This list of Questions and Answers (Q&As) give
further guidance on a situation where the United Kingdom (UK) becomes a third country without a ratified withdrawal agreement and hence without the transition period provided for in the Withdrawal Agreement
The withdrawal date is 1 November 2019
In addition, these Q&As give additional guidance on the application of Regulation (EU) 2019/498

https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/file_import/fisheries_and_aquaculture_en.pdf
Regulation (EU) 2019/497 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 March 2019 amending Regulation (EU) No 508/2014 as regards certain rules relating to the European Maritime and Fisheries Fund following the withdrawal of the United Kingdom from the Union, OJ L 85I, 27.3.2019, p. 22.
Regulation (EU) 2019/498 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 March 2019 amending Regulation (EU) 2017/2403 as regards fishing authorisations for Union fishing vessels in United Kingdom waters and fishing operations of United Kingdom fishing vessels in Union waters, OJ L 85I , 27.3.2019, p. 25.
The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. Following a request by the United Kingdom, the European Council (Article 50) agreed on 11 April 2019 (European Council Decision (EU) 2019/584, OJ L 101, 11.4.2019, p. 1) to extend further the period provided for in Article 50(3) TEU until 31 October 2019. This means that the United Kingdom will be, as of 1 November 2019 Withdrawal Agreement is ratified by both parties before that date, the withdrawal takes place on the first day of the month following the completion of the ratification procedures.

1.
ISHING IN UNION WATERS
THIRD COUNTRY WATERS AND HIGH SEAS 1.1. Will the fishing opportunities regulation 2019
still be applicable in the EU as of the withdrawal date
Yes. The fishing opportunities regulation 2019 will remain applicable to EU Member States in waters other than the UK waters.  1.2. Can UK control and enforcement authorities demand that I allow them to inspect my fishing vessel, even if I am not in UK waters? Do my obligations as master during control (according to Regulations (EC) No 1224/20
6 and (EU) 404/20117) still apply? No. As of the withdrawal date, these control regulations no longer apply to the United Kingdom. UK authorities will not be allowed to carry out inspections in Union waters. Regarding inspections in international waters, the control and enforcement modalities applicable by the relevant fisheries organisations remain valid. 2.
ISHING IN UK WATERS 2.1. Will the fishing opportunities regulation 2019 apply to the United Kingdom as of the withdrawal date
No. As of the withdrawal date, Union law  including the fishing opportunities regulation 2019  no longer applies to the United Kingdom. The United Kingdom will have to define the fishing opportunities for UK vessels in domestic legislation.  This also means that Union vessels are allowed to fish in UK waters according to EU law only up until the withdrawal date
2.2. Will the United Kingdom stick to the quotas agreed for 2019? This is a decision for the United Kingdom to make. In the future, c
operation with the United Kingdom on fisheries will have to be based on alternative legal frameworks and cooperation mechanisms, based on international law and UK national or EU law respectively.

Council Regulation (EU) 2019/124 of 30 January 2019 fixing for 2019 the fishing opportunities for certain fish stocks and groups of fish stocks, applicable in Union waters and, for Union fishing vessels, in certain non-Union waters OJ L 29, 31.1.2019, p. 1.
Council Regulation (EC) No 1224/2009 of 20 November 2009 establishing a Community control system for ensuring compliance with the rules of the common fisheries policy, OJ L 343, 22.12.2009, p. 1.
Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) No 404/2011 of 8 April 2011 laying down detailed rules for the implementation of Council Regulation (EC) No 1224/2009 establishing a Community control system for ensuring compliance with the rules of the Common Fisheries Policy, OJ L 112, 30.4.2011, p. 1.
3 2.3. Will EU vessels be able to continue to fish in UK waters? As of the withdrawal date, access to UK waters will only be possible if the United Kingdom explicitly authorises that
and if the flag State authorises the vessel to fish in UK waters.  As set out in Regulation (EU) 2019/498, the EU is ready to provide continued access to its waters until 31 December 2019, if the United Kingdom is going to provide access to its waters for the EU vessels, and respects the terms of the fishing opportunities regulation 2019. Regulation (EU) 2019/498 set
out the procedure to be followed by vessels in order to obtain authorisations that will be required by the United Kingdom and from their flag State to fish in UK waters. In practice: the flag Member State will have to provide the information required by the United Kingdom to the Commission, which will send the request for authorisation to the United Kingdom
2.4.
hat if there is a lag in obtaining such authorisations from the United Kingdom after the withdrawal of the United Kingdom?  As long as Union vessels are not authorised to access UK waters, they cannot fish in these waters as of the withdrawal date
In order to address the potential economic cost of a temporary disruption to access to UK waters for most affected operators, Regulation (EU) 2019/497 gives the possibility to Member States to use support under the European Maritime and Fisheries Fund for temporary cessation of fishing activities for fishermen and operators that have significant dependence on access to UK waters
2.5. Will the EU fleet be allowed to continue to land in UK ports? As of the withdrawal date, access to UK ports and landings in those ports are subject to UK rules.  Should a Union vessel land in a UK port, the products will be subject to sanitary and customs checks by UK authorities, as well as any other fisheries-specific checks established in UK legislation. 2.6. Will the UK fleet be allowed to continue to land in EU-27 ports as of the withdrawal date
Yes, subject to the EU rules applicable to third-country vessels, notably on designated ports and prior notice.

Cf. Section 1 of Chapter II of Council Regulation (EC) No 1005/2008 of 29 September 2008 establishing a Community system to prevent, deter and eliminate illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing, OJ L 286, 29.10.2008, p. 1.
4 2.7. Will Union vessels need an International Maritime Organization (IMO) number to fish in UK waters? Should Union vessels be authorised to fish in UK waters, they will have to follow EU rules on the management of the EU fleet active in the waters of a third country and they will have to abide by the applicable UK legislation (incl. relevant rules on IMO numbers)
According to point (b) of the the second sub-paragraph of Article 6 of Regulation (EU) 404/2011, the IMO number applies to all Union fishing vessels or fishing vessels controlled by Union operators under a chartering arrangement, of 15 metres length overall and above, operating outside Union waters. 2.8. Who communicates to the EU fishermen whether they are authorised or not to continue to fish in UK waters as of the withdrawal date
It is the responsibility of fishermen themselves to know the rules and regulations in place and act in accordance with them. Vessels may continue fishing only on the basis of a valid authorisation. As set out in Regulation (EU) 2019/498, the EU is ready to provide continued access to its waters until 31 December 2019, if the United Kingdom is going to provide access to its waters for the EU vessels, and respects the terms of the fishing opportunities regulation 2019. Should there be, on this basis, continued access to UK waters for EU vessels, the Commission will inform the Member States. The flag Member State is then expected to inform its fishermen adequately about applicable rules and procedures
3.
THER ASPECTS RELATING TO FISHING ACTIVITIES 3.1. Can
Union vessel continue to transit UK waters as of the withdrawal date
Yes, iterritorial sea and freedom of navigation in the exclusive economic zone. In absence of an authorisation to fish in these waters, fishing vessels in transit must have gear stowed and secured so that it is not readily available for fishing
3.2. If I fish near the exclusive economic zone border and drift into UK waters when I am gathering my trawl, will that be regarded as fishing in UK waters? Yes. The hauling of active fishing gears is a fishing operation that requires authorisation in accordance with Art 3(2)(g) of Regulation (EU) 2017/2403. It is also defined as a fishing activity by Article 4(1) of Regulation (EC) No 1224/2009. Therefore, and as it already happens with fishing activities close to neighbouring third countries' waters, the hauling operation must take place
in Union waters unless the Union vessel is authorised to fish within UK waters. 3.3.
ill UK control and enforcement authorities have access to Union fishing vessel monitoring system (VMS) data and logbook data from FLUX? No. However, as set out in Regulation (EU) 2019/498, the EU is ready to provide continued access to its waters until 31 December 2019, if the United Kingdom is going to provide access to its waters for the EU vessels, and respects the terms of the fishing opportunities regulation 2019. In this case, consideration will be given to the continued exchange of VMS and logbook data via FLUX.
3.4. If I spot a UK fishing vessel in Union waters, who should I contact? Any sighting of a third country vessel in Union waters and any evidence of potential illegal fishing activities by fishing vessels in Union waters should be brought to the attention of the control authorities of the relevant coastal Member State.  3.5. What kind of reporting will be required upon entry into UK waters as of the withdrawal date
This will depend on the relevant UK requirements.  3.6. Will quota swaps with the United Kingdom still be possible as of the withdrawal date
No.  However, as set out in Regulation (EU) 2019/498, the EU is ready to provide continued access to its waters until 31 December 2019, if the United Kingdom is going to provide access to its waters for the EU vessels, and respects the terms of the fishing opportunities regulation 2019. In this case, the possibility of quota swaps with the UK is maintained in 2019 and the Commission will execute the formal quota exchange with the United Kingdom in line with the specific procedure set out in Regulation (EU) 2019/498
3.7. What fisheries conservation and control rules apply to fishing by an EU vessel, before the withdrawal date, in UK waters, if the EU vessel lands in an EU port after the withdrawal of the United Kingdom? The EU rules of the Common Fisheries Policy will apply in this case
3.8. What fisheries conservation and control rules apply to fishing by an EU vessel, before the withdrawal date, in UK waters, if the EU vessel lands in a UK port after the withdrawal of the United Kingdom? As of the withdrawal date, the UK fisheries rules will apply to this case.
6 4.
USTOMS STATUS
CUSTOMS FORMALITIES AND CUSTOMS DUTIES  4.1. What is the customs status of fish caught by an EU vessel
in the UK exclusive economic zone when brought to the customs territory of the Union
For the purpose of the customs status of Union goods for products of sea-fishing the exclusive economic zone is treated in the same way as high sea, therefore, the general rules on the customs status of products of sea-fishing apply, whether the fish was caught there by an EU vessel before or as of the withdrawal date
4.2. What is the customs status of fish caught by an EU vessel as of the withdrawal date in UK territorial waters? Those products of sea-fishing will have the customs status of non-Union goods when brought to the customs territory of the Union. When released for free circulation, they shall be granted relief from import duty according to Article 208(1)(a) of the Union Customs Code10 (see also below, Q&A 4.6). 4.3. What is the customs status of fish caught by an EU vessel in UK territorial waters before the withdrawal date, but landed in an EU port after the withdrawal of the United Kingdom? In this case, the products of sea-fishing will keep the customs status of Union goods subject to a proof thereof (cf. Article 119(3)(a) of Delegated Regulation (EU) 2015/244611). 4.4. Do customs formalities apply to an EU vessel landing in an EU port after the withdrawal of the United Kingdom, after having caught fish in UK territorial waters before the withdrawal date? In general, where an EU vessel catches fish in the territorial waters of a Member State and then lands the fish in a port in the same or in another Member State without leaving the territorial waters (i.e. it is all the time in the customs territory of the Union), no customs formalities will apply, as the fish will be presumed to have the customs status of Union goods (Article 153(1) of the Union Customs Code
However, customs may check whether the vessel has remained in the territorial waters all the time.  Nonetheless, in this specific situation of the UK withdrawal, i
an EU vessel lands fish caught in the UK territorial waters before the withdrawal date in an
1(44) of Delegated Regulation (EU) 2015/2446). 10
Regulation (EU) No 952/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 9 October 2013 laying down the Union Customs Code, OJ L 269, 10.10.2013, p. 1. 11
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2015/2446 of 28 July 2015 supplementing Regulation (EU) No 952/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council as regards detailed rules concerning certain provisions of the Union Customs Code, OJ L 343, 29.12.2015, p. 1.
7 EU port as of that date, customs may ask for a proof of status of that fish according to Article 130 of Delegated Regulation (EU) 2015/2446
Where an EU vessel catches fish in the territorial waters of a Member State and crosses the high sea before landing the fish in a port in the same or in another Member State, the customs status of Union goods of the fish will have to be proven (Article 119(3)(a) of Delegated Regulation (EU) 2015/2446). Until then it will remain under customs supervision. 4.5. What rules apply to fish caught by an EU vessel at high sea, transhipped and transported through the UK and then brought to the EU as of the withdrawal date? Where the fish is landed in the UK before the withdrawal date, but it cannot be excluded that it reaches the EU only as of that date, it is advisable to provide the truck driver with documents proving the customs status of Union goods of the fish.12 Where the fish is landed in the UK as of the withdrawal date, the general rules for transhipment and transport through a country or territory which is not part of the customs territory of the Union apply. In the case of the UK, the fish can also be placed under a transit procedure, as the UK will become a Contracting Party to the Convention on a common transit procedure as of the withdrawal date in the no deal situation.  4.6. Do customs duties apply to fish caught in UK territorial waters by an EU vessel? According to Article 208(1)(a) of the Union Customs Code, fish taken from the territorial sea of a country or territory outside the customs territory of the Union by vessels solely registered or recorded in a Member State and flying the flag of that State is exempted from duties. Hence, no duties for fish caught by EU vessels in UK territorial waters will be due, no matter if the vessel lands in an EU port before or after the withdrawal of the United Kingdom. Evidence has to be provided that the conditions laid down in the Article 208(1) of the Union Customs Code are fulfilled. 4.7. Do customs duties apply to fish caught in Union waters by an EU vessel (before or after the withdrawal of the United Kingdom), but landed in an UK port as of the withdrawal date? As of the withdrawal date, UK rules will apply in this case. 4.8. What customs tariffs apply in the EU as of the withdrawal date? Tariff Schedule will apply. Regarding the customs tariffs and the calculation of the customs debt, please                                                            12
See also  Withdrawal of the United Kingdom and customs related matters in case https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/file_import/guidance-customs-procedures_en.pdf

Notice to stakeholders
withdrawal of the United Kingdom and EU rules on customs debt and customs tariffs.13 4.9. What customs tariffs apply in the United Kingdom as of the withdrawal date? The United Kingdom submitted its proposed tariff schedule in July 2018
which is subject to the usual procedure under the WTO.    On 13 March 2019 the United Kingdom has published temporary preferential and non-preferential (MFN) tariffs that will apply for a period up to 12 months in the event of no deal and special arrangements regarding the border on the island of Ireland.14
5.
ANITARY CONTROLS OFFICIAL CONTROLS 5.1. What rules will apply to fish caught in UK waters (before or after the withdrawal of the United Kingdom) but landed in an EU port as of the withdrawal date? The EU rules on official controls of fishery products apply to all fresh fish immediately landed from fishing vessels in EU ports, irrespectively of the flag of the vessel or where the fish was caught.15 5.2. What rules will apply to fish caught in EU waters (before or after the withdrawal of the United Kingdom) but landed in an UK port as of the withdrawal date? As of the withdrawal date, UK rules will apply.16
13
https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/notice_to_stakeholders_brexit_customs_debt_final.pdf.  14   The relevant press release can be found here, with detailed information on tariffs here, and guidance on the Northern Ireland border here
15
Annex III to Regulation (EC) No 854/2004 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 29 April 2004 laying down specific rules for the organisation of official controls on products of animal origin intended for human consumption, OJ L 139, 30.4.2004, p. 206. 16
If fish is landed in the United Kingdom and afterwards transported to the EU, as of the withdrawal date the EU rules for official controls of at border inspection points apply upon entry in the EU.
EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL FOR MOBILITY AND TRANSPORT
Brussels, 19 January 201
NOTICE TO STAKEHOLDERS
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND EU RULES ON THE MINIMUM LEVEL OF TRAINING OF SEAFARERS AND THE MUTUAL RECOGNITION OF SEAFARER
CERTIFICATES The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. This means that
unless a ratified withdrawal agreement
establishes another date
all Union primary and secondary law will cease to apply to the United Kingdom from 30 March 2019, 00:00h (CET) ('the withdrawal date').
The United Kingdom will then become a 'third country'.
In view of the considerable uncertainties, in particular concerning the content of a possible withdrawal agreement, all seafarers subject to Directive 2008/106/EC on the minimum level of training of seafarers
and Directive 2005/45/EC on the mutual recognition of seafarers' certificates issued by the Member States
are reminded of legal repercussions
which need to be considered when the United Kingdom becomes a third country
Subject to any transitional arrangement that may be contained in a possible withdrawal agreement, as of the withdrawal date, the EU rules in the field of minimum level and mutual recognition of seafarers' certificates no longer apply to the United Kingdom. This has in particular the following consequence
for the validity of certificates
According to Article 3 of Directive 2008/106/EC
seafarers serving on board a vessel flying the flag of an EU Member State have to hold the requisite certificate of competency or certificate of proficiency (hereafter "certificates") issued by that
Negotiations are ongoing with the United Kingdom with a view to reaching a withdrawal agreement.
Furthermore, in accordance with Article 50(3) of the Treaty on European Union, the European Council, in agreement with the United Kingdom, may unanimously decide that the Treaties cease to apply at a later date.
A third country is a country not member of the EU.
Directive 2008/106/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 19 November 2008 on the minimum level of training of seafarers, OJ L 323, 3.12.2008, p. 33
5
Directive 2005/45/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 7 September 2005 on the mutual recognition of seafarers' certificates issued by the Member States and amending Directive 2001/25/EC, J L 255, 30.9.2005, p. 160

Member State, by another EU Member State or by one of the third countries recognised under Article 19 of Directive 2008/106/EC. The Member State of the vessel recognise
the certificates issued to seafarers by the other Member States or the recognised third countries, for such certificates to be valid in that Member State. There are two distinct recognition procedure

Article 3 of Directive 2005/45/EC provides that every Member State shall recognise the certificates issued to seafarers by the other Member States: the recognition of these certificates (by the Member State of the vessel) must be accompanied by an 'endorsement attesting such recognition

Article 19(4) of Directive 2008/106/EC provides that a Member State may decide to endorse the certificates issued by the recognised third countries.
As of the withdrawal date
the certificates issued to seafarers by the United Kingdom can no longer be presented for an 'endorsement attesting recognition
by an EU-27 Member State under Directive 2005/45/EC. The 'endorsement[s] attesting recognition' issued prior to the withdrawal date by EU-27 Member States under Directive 2005/45/EC of certificates issued to seafarers by the United Kingdom will continue to be valid until their expir
A master or an officer holding an 'endorsement attesting recognition' issued by a Member State will be able to continue working on board vessels flying the flag of that Member State. However, they will not be able to change and work on board a vessel flying the flag of another Member State on the basis of their existing UK-issued certificates, given that the basis for the recognition of their certificates by that Member State (Directive 2005/45/EC) would no longer be applicable.   As of the withdrawal date, recognition by a
EU-27 Member State of certificates issued to seafarers by the United Kingdom will be subject to the conditions set out in Article 19 of Directive 2008/106/EC
in line with the new status of the United Kingdom as a third country.
reparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for Union and national authorities, but also for private parties.
The website of the Commission on maritime transport (https://ec.europa.eu/transport/modes/maritime/seafarers_en) provide
general information. These pages will be updated with further information, where necessary.
European Commission
Directorate-General for Mobility and Transport
The list of third countries recognised at EU level was published in OJ C 261, 8.8.2015, p. 25. Following the publication of this list, Montenegro was recognised by the Commission Implementing  Decision published in OJ L 107, 25.4.2017, p. 31, Ethiopia was recognised by the Commission Implementing Decision published in OJ L 177, 8.7.2017, p. 43 and Fiji was recognised by the Commission Implementing Decision published in OJ L 202, 3.8.2017, p. 6

EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL FOR MOBILITY AND TRANSPORT
Brussels, 19 January 2018
OTICE TO STAKEHOLDERS
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND EU RULES IN THE FIELD OF AIR TRANSPORT The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. This means that
unless a ratified withdrawal agreement
establishes another date, all Union primary and secondary law will cease to apply to the United Kingdom from 30 March 2019, 00:00h (CET) ('the withdrawal date').
The United Kingdom will then become a 'third country'.
In view of the considerable uncertainties, in particular concerning the content of a possible withdrawal agreement, all operators are reminded of legal repercussions, which need to be considered when the United Kingdom becomes a third country
Subject to any transitional arrangement that may be contained in a possible withdrawal agreement, as of the withdrawal date, the EU rules in the field of air transport no longer apply to the United Kingdom. This has
in particular
the following consequences in the different areas of air transport
1.
PERATING LICENCES
Air carriers holding EU operating licences: In order to obtain and keep an EU operating licence and benefit from the intra-EU air traffic rights, air carrier
must comply at all times with the conditions under Article 4 of Regulation (EC) No 1008/2008 on air services4. The conditions include, among others, the need to have one's principal place of business
within
Negotiations are ongoing with the United Kingdom with a view to reaching a withdrawal agreement.
Furthermore, in accordance with Article 50(3) of the Treaty on European Union, the European Council, in agreement with the United Kingdom, may unanimously decide that the Treaties cease to apply at a later date.
A third country is a country not member of the EU.
Regulation (EC) No 1008/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 September 2008 on common rules for the operation of air services in the Community, OJ L 293, 31.10.2008, p. 3
5
the EU Member State within which the principal financial functions and operational control, including continued airworthiness management, of the Community air carrier are exercised (Article 2(26) of Regulation (EC) No 1008/2008).
2 an EU Member State, and to be majority owned and effectively controlled by EU Member States and/or nationals of EU Member States. If the conditions are no longer fulfilled as a consequence of the United Kingdom becoming a third country, the operating licence at issue will no longer be valid.
Air carriers holding an operating licence delivered by the UK authorities: As of the withdrawal date, the operating licences granted to airlines by the United Kingdom Civil Aviation Authority will no longer be valid EU operating licences.  2.
NTERNATIONAL ASPECTS
As of the withdrawal date, the United Kingdom will automatically cease to be covered by air transport agreements of the Union, whether these have been entered into by the Union alone (e.g. the Air Transport Agreement with Switzerland6) or by the Union and its Member States acting jointly (e.g. the Air Transport Agreement with the USA7). This has
in particular
consequences as regards access to designation/traffic rights and other areas covered by the said agreements.
Air carrier
of the United Kingdom: Air carriers of the United Kingdom will no longer enjoy traffic rights under any air transport agreement to which the Union is a party, be it to or from the territory of the United Kingdom, be it to or from the territory of any of the EU Member States.
Air carriers of the United Kingdom will no longer have access to designation/traffic rights so far available under the bilateral air transport agreements between EU Member State
and a third country on account of the principle of EU designation accepted by the third country concerned
o
ir carrier
of any of the EU Member States: Air carriers of the EU Member States will no longer enjoy traffic rights to or from the territory of the United Kingdom granted to Union carriers by a third country under any air transport agreement to which the Union is a party.
ights under the said agreements as regards, inter alia, cooperative market arrangements including leasing, intermodal service or operational flexibility may be affected if, and to the extent to which, they are exercised in the territory of the United Kingdom or in connection with carriers of the United Kingdom. Air carriers of the EU Member States may no longer have access to designation/traffic rights so far available under the bilateral air transport agreements between the United Kingdom and a third country on account of the principle of EU designation accepted by the third country concerned.
Air carriers of countries which are not Member State
of the EU:
Agreement between the European Community and the Swiss Confederation on Air Transport, OJ L 114, 30.4.2002, p. 73.
Air Transport Agreement between the European Community and its Member States, on the one hand, and the United States of America, on the other hand, OJ L 134, 25.5.2007, p. 4

Air carriers of countries which are not Member States of the EU will no longer benefit from access to traffic rights to or from the territory of the United Kingdom, or any other rights where these have been granted to their country under any air transport agreement to which the Union is a party. 3.
VIATION CERTIFICATES AND LICENCES Further information on aviation certificates and licences, as well as other aviation safety related questions, including aviation safety agreements, will be made available on https://www.easa.europa.eu/
Preparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for Union and national authorities, but also for private parties.
The website of the Commission on air transport (https://ec.europa.eu/transport/modes/air_en) provide
general information. These pages will be updated with further information, where necessary.
European Commission
Directorate
eneral for Mobility and Transport
EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL FOR MOBILITY AND TRANSPORT
Brussels, 18 January 201
REV1  replaces the Notice to stakeholders dated 13 April 2018
OTICE TO STAKEHOLDERS
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND EU AVIATION SAFETY RULE
The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. This means that as from 30 March
the United
Preparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for EU and national authorities but also for private parties.  In view of the uncertainties surrounding the ratification of the Withdrawal Agreement, all interested parties, and especially economic operators, are reminded of legal repercussions, which need to be considered when the United Kingdom becomes a third country. Subject to the transition period provided for in the draft Withdrawal Agreement,
as of the withdrawal date, the EU rules in the field of civil aviation safety will no longer apply to the United Kingdom. This has
in particular
the following consequences in the different areas of civil aviation safety

In accordance with Article 50(3) of the Treaty on European Union, the European Council, in agreement with the United Kingdom, may unanimously decide that the Treaties cease to apply at a later date.
A third country is a country not member of the EU.
Cf. Part four of the draft Agreement on the withdrawal of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland from the European Union and the European Atomic Energy Community, as agreed at negotiator's level on 14 November 2018 (https://ec.europa.eu/commission/publications/draft-agreement-withdrawal-uk-eu-agreed-negotiators-level-14-november-2018-including-text-article-132_en

1.
ERTIFICATES
ISSUED BY THE EUROPEAN AVIATION SAFETY AGENCY TO HOLDERS LOCATED IN THE UNITED KINGDOM In accordance with Article 77 of the Basic Regulation5, the European Aviation Safety Agency (EASA
carries out the functions and tasks of the State of Design on behalf of Member States with regard to the type certificates for products6, certificates for parts and appliances
and certificates for design organisations. Such certificates issued by EASA to persons and organisations located in the United Kingdom will therefore no longer be valid in the EU as of the withdrawal date. The products, parts and appliances concerned will no longer be considered as certified in accordance with Section I of Chapter III of the Basic Regulation.
2.
ERTIFICATES ISSUED BY THE COMPETENT AUTHORITIES OF THE UNITED KINGDOM
ertificates issued before the withdrawal date by the competent authorities of the United Kingdom by virtue of the Basic Regulation and any relevant implementing or delegated acts will
longer be valid as of the withdrawal date in the EU. This concerns in particular:  Certificates of airworthiness, restricted certificates of airworthiness, permits to fly, approvals of organisations responsible for the maintenance of products, parts and appliances, approvals for organisations responsible for  the manufacture of products, parts and appliances, approvals for maintenance training organisations, and certificates for personnel responsible for the release of a product, part or appliance after maintenance, issued pursuant to Section I of Chapter III of the Basic Regulation;  Pilot licences, pilot medical certificates, certificates for pilot training organisations, certificates for aero-medical centres, certificates for flight simulation training devices, certificates for persons responsible for providing
According to Article 3(12
of the Basic Regulation
"certificate" means any certificate, approval, licence, authorisation, attestation  or other document issued as a result of certification attesting compliance with the applicable requirements
5
Regulation (EU) 2018/113
of the European Parliament and of the Council of 4 July 2018 on common rules in the field of civil aviation and establishing a European Union Aviation Safety Agency, OJ L 212, 22.8.2018, p. 1
That
egulation repealed and replaced Regulation (EC) No 216/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 20 February 2008 on common rules in the field of civil aviation and establishing a European Aviation Safety Agency, and repealing Council Directive 91/670/EEC, Regulation (EC) No 1592/2002 and Directive 2004/36/EC (OJ L 79, 19.3.2008, p. 1)
References in this Notice to the Basic Regulation must be understood as including the latter Regulation, insofar as it concerns periods prior to 11 September 2018.
According to Article 3
) of the Basic Regulation, "product" mean
an aircraft, engine or propeller.
Stakeholders are informed that the Commission has proposed, on 19 December 2018, a time-limited extension of the validity of certain certificates, in order to allow for obtaining a certificate from the Civil Aviation Authority of the United Kingdom, insofar as the latter will have become the "State of design" as of the withdrawal date (see, for more information, https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness/legislative-initiatives-and-other-legal-acts_en

flight training, flight simulation training or assessing pilots' skill, and certificates for aero medical examiners, issued pursuant to Section II of Chapter III of the Basic Regulation;  Certificates for aircraft operators and attestations for the cabin crew
issued pursuant to Article
30 and 22 of the Basic Regulation;  Certificates for aerodromes, certificates for ATM/ANS providers, licences and medical certificates for air traffic controllers, certificates for air traffic controller training organisations, certificates for aero medical centres and aero medical examiners responsible for air traffic controllers, certificates for persons responsible for providing practical training or assessing the skills of air traffic controllers, issued pursuant to Section
I
to VI of Chapter III of the Basic Regulation
Stakeholders are reminded that EASA has started to process applications for certain Third Country approvals from existing UK approval holders. This concerns the following certificates and approvals:
Production Organisation Approval
POA (EASA Form 55)   Letters of agreement for production without a POA (EASA Form 65)   Maintenance Organisation Approvals
MOA (EASA Form 3 & Form 3MF)   Maintenance Training Organisation Approvals
MTOA (EASA Form 11)  Continuing Airworthiness Management Organisation
(EASA Form 14)   Flight Simulator Training Devices
FSTD (EASA Form 145)   Approved Training Organisations
ATO (EASA Form 143)   Aero-Medical Centres
AeMC certificates (EASA Form 146)  In addition, stakeholders are informed that EASA is starting to process applications by UK aircraft operators for
authorisation as third country aircraft operators.
3.
ERTIFICATES ISSUED BY THE LEGAL AND NATURAL PERSONS CERTIFIED BY THE COMPETENT AUTHORITIES OF THE UNITED KINGDOM
ertificates confirming compliance with the provisions of the Basic Regulation and any relevant implementing or delegated acts issued before the withdrawal date by the legal and natural persons certified by the competent authorities of the United Kingdom on the basis of the Basic Regulation and those acts will no longer be valid
https://www.easa.europa.eu/brexit
9
https://www.easa.europa.eu/brexit
4 as of the withdrawal date
unless such a certificate concerns a part or appliance10 which was installed prior to the withdrawal date and in compliance with the applicable EU airworthiness requirements, in an aircraft covered by a valid certificate of airworthiness issued prior to the withdrawal date by a
EU-27 national authority on the basis of Article 14 of the Basic Regulation.11 4.
IRCRAFT OPERATORS FROM THE UNITED KINGDOM As of the withdrawal date
aircraft operators from the United Kingdom will be considered as third country aircraft operators within the meaning of Article 2(1)(c) of the Basic Regulation and other EU legislation on aviation safety. This means that
safety authorisation from the EASA will be required in accordance with Articles 60 and 82(1) of the Basic Regulation
Stakeholders are informed that EASA is starting to process applications for third country aircraft operators.12 5.
IRCRAFT REGISTERED IN THE UNITED KINGDOM As of the withdrawal date
aircraft registered in the United Kingdom will be considered as third country registered aircraft within the meaning of Article 2(1) of the Basic Regulation and other EU legislation on aviation safety. This means that EU aircraft operators using such aircraft will need to comply with the provisions of the Basic Regulation and any relevant implementing and delegated acts
as well as relevant provisions stemming from Regulation (EC) No 1008/2008 on air services13 concerning the use of third country registered aircraft.
n particular
EU-27 air carriers intending to wet lease aircraft registered in the United Kingdom will be bound by the corresponding provisions relating to such aircraft. As regards safety, they will thus have to demonstrate that safety standards equivalent to those imposed by Union or national law are met
* * * In case persons, including aviation personnel14, as well as organisations located in the United Kingdom, holding certificates referred to in points 1, 2 or 3 above which cease to                                                  10
This does not concern products as defined in Article 3(3) of the Basic Regulation (see above, footnote 6). 11
Stakeholders are informed that the Commission has proposed, on 19 December 2018, a measure allowing for the continued use for products, parts and appliances certified, before the withdrawal date, by the legal and natural persons certified by the Civil Aviation Authority of the United Kingdom (see, for more information, https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness/legislative-initiatives-and-other-legal-acts_en). 12
https://www.easa.europa.eu/brexit
13
Regulation (EC) No 1008/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 September 2008 on common rules for the operation of air services in the Community, OJ L 293, 31.10.2008, p. 3
14
E.g. pilots, cabin crew, instructors, assessors, examiners
5 be valid as of the withdrawal date, would like to continue their activities in the EU as of that date, they would need to ensure, as of that date, compliance with certification requirements according to the EU legislation on aviation safety. In respect of products, parts and appliances certified before the withdrawal date and put in use in the EU before the withdrawal date and/or relevant organisations or persons requiring certification, the Commission is considering whether any steps are needed to facilitate continued compliance with EU law, including through additional guidance.
The website
of the Commission on air transport, including aviation safety (https://ec.europa.eu/transport/modes/air_en) and of EASA (https://www.easa.europa.eu/) provide general information. These pages will be updated with further information, where necessary
European Commission
Directorate
eneral for Mobility and Transport
EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL FOR MOBILITY AND TRANSPORT
Brussels, 19 January 2018
OTICE TO STAKEHOLDERS
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND EU RULES IN THE FIELD OF ROAD TRANSPORT The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. This means that
unless a ratified withdrawal agreement
establishes another date, all Union primary and secondary law will cease to apply to the United Kingdom from 30 March 2019, 00:00h (CET) ('the withdrawal date').
The United Kingdom will then become a 'third country'.
In view of the considerable uncertainties
in particular concerning the content of a possible withdrawal agreement, road transport operators within the meaning of Article 2 of Regulation (EC) No 1071/2009
are reminded of legal repercussions, which need to be considered when the United Kingdom becomes a third country
Subject to any transitional arrangement that may be contained in a possible withdrawal agreement, as of the withdrawal date, the EU rules in the field of road transport no longer apply to the United Kingdom. This has
in particular
the following consequences in the different areas of road transport

ERTIFICATES
LICENCES AND ATTESTATIONS
Certificate of professional competence for road transport operators/transport managers
According to Articles 3(1)(d), 4(1)
nd 8 of Regulation (EC) No 1071/2009
natural persons engaged in the occupation of road transport operator in the EU and transport managers employed by an undertaking engaged in
h
occupation of road transport operator have to hold a certificate of professional competence issued by authorities of a EU Member State or by bodies duly authorised by a EU Member State for that purpose
As of the withdrawal date, certificates of professional competence issued by an authority of
Negotiations are ongoing with the United Kingdom with a view to reaching a withdrawal agreement.
Furthermore, in accordance with Article 50(3) of the Treaty on European Union, the European Council, in agreement with the United Kingdom, may unanimously decide that the Treaties cease to apply at a later date.
A third country is a country not member of the EU.
Regulation (EC) No 1071/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 21 October 2009 establishing common rules concerning the conditions to be complied with to pursue the occupation of road transport operator and repealing Council Directive 96/26/EC, OJ L 300, 14.11.2009, p.51
2 the United Kingdom or a body authorised by the United Kingdom will no longer be valid in the EU-27
o Driver attestation for third-country drivers: According to Article 3 of Regulation (EC) No 1072/2009,
international carriage shall be subject to a Community licence
and, when the driver is a national of a third country, in conjunction with a driver attestation.  Thus, as of the withdrawal date, drivers who are United Kingdom nationals and do not constitute long-term residents in the Union, within the meaning of Council Directive 2003/109/EC, and who work for a Union haulier holding a Community licence require a driver attestation
In accordance with Article 5(2) of Regulation (EC) No 1072/20097, this driver attestation shall be issued by the competent authorities of the Member State of establishment of the haulier holding a Community licence for each driver who is neither a national nor a long-term resident within the meaning of Council Directive 2003/109/EC
whom that haulier lawfully employs or who is put at his disposal.
Certificate of professional competence for drivers: In accordance with Directive 2003/59/EC9, drivers in the Union of a vehicle intended for the carriage of goods or for the carriage of passengers need to hold a certificate of professional competence certifying the initial qualification or periodic training and issued by competent authorities of a
EU Member State or by an approved training centre in an EU Member State. Drivers who are nationals of an EU Member State obtain their initial qualification in the EU Member State of their normal residence while drivers who are nationals of third countries do this in the EU Member State which issued a work permit to them. As of the withdrawal date, certificates of professional competence issued by the United Kingdom or by an approved training centre in the United Kingdom will no longer be valid in the EU-27.  As of the withdrawal date, drivers who are nationals of the United Kingdom but employed by an undertaking established in the Union or Union nationals resident in the United Kingdom but employed by an undertaking established in the Union will have to follow the professional drivers training in the EU-27 Member State where the undertaking employing them is established.
Driving licence: According to Article 2 of Directive 2006/126/EC10
driving licences issued by Member States of the Union are mutually recognised. As of the
Regulation (EC) No 1072/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 21 October 2009 on common rules for access to the international road haulage market, OJ L 300, 14.11.2009, p.72.
Regarding the Community licence, see below.
Regulation (EC) No 1072/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 21 October 2009 on common rules for access to the international road haulage market, OJ L 300, 14.11.2009, p.72.
Council Directive 2003/109/EC of 25 November 2003 concerning the status of third-country nationals who are long-term residents, OJ L 016, 23.1.2004, p.44
9
Directive 2003/59/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 July 2003 on the initial qualification and periodic training of drivers of certain road vehicles for the carriage of goods or passengers, amending Council Regulation (EEC) No 3820/85 and Council Directive 91/439/EEC and repealing Council Directive 76/914/EEC, OJ L 226 10.9.2003, p. 4
10
Directive 2006/126/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 20 December 2006 on driving licences (Recast), OJ L 403, 30.12.2006, p. 18.
withdrawal date, a driving licence issued by the United Kingdom will no longer be recognised by the Member States on the basis of this legislation.
The recognition of driving licences issued by third countries is not addressed in Union law but regulated at Member States level. In Member States which are Contracting Parties to the 1949 Geneva Convention on Road Traffic, this Convention applies.11
CCESS TO THE PROFESSION
TO THE MARKET
According to Article 3(1)(a) of Regulation (EC) No 1071/2009, undertakings engaged in the occupation of road transport operator in the Union must have an effective and stable establishment in an EU Member State. As of the withdrawal date, undertakings that have their establishment in the United Kingdom will no longer fulfil this requirement.
According to Article 4 of Regulation (EC) No 1071/2009, an undertaking which engages in the occupation of road transport operator shall designate a transport manager. In accordance with Article 4(1)(c) of that Regulation, this transport manager has to be resident in the Union. As of the withdrawal date, transport managers resident in the United Kingdom working for a Union road transport operator will no longer fulfil this requirement. Undertakings established in the Union that only have a transport manager resident in the United Kingdom can no longer engage in the occupation of road transport operator within the EU-27
o The international carriage of goods in the Union is subject to possession of a Community licence, in accordance with Regulation (EC) No 1072/2009. These Community licences can only be issued by the competent authorities of the EU Member State in which the haulier is established and where such haulier is entitled to carry out the international carriage of goods by road. As of the withdrawal date, a Community licence issued by the competent authorities of the United Kingdom will no longer be valid in the EU
7. Hauliers established in the United Kingdom will no longer have access to the internal road haulage market in the Union.  However, the multilateral quota system managed by the European Conference of Ministers of Transport (now International Transport Forum) would apply at that point
Hence, cross-trade operations (i.e. the carriage of goods from country A to country B by a haulier established in country C) by United Kingdom hauliers in the Union and by Union hauliers from or to the United Kingdom could be carried out under that system and within the limits thereof. That system does not permit cabotage operations, i.e. operations by foreign carriers within a single State.  This means
in particular
that United Kingdom hauliers will no longer be able to perform cabotage operations within any of the EU-27 Member States.                                                  11
For further information the responsible authority of the respective Member State should be consulted.

In accordance with Regulation (EC) No 1073/200912, the international carriage of passengers by coach and bus is subject to the possession of a Community licence issued by the competent authorities of the Member State of establishment. As of the withdrawal date, Community licences issued by the United Kingdom will no longer be valid in the EU-27.
Regular international services between Member States are subject to an authorisation in accordance with Chapter III of Regulation (EC) No 1073/2009. As of the withdrawal date, authorisations involving the United Kingdom (for pick up or set down of passengers) are no longer valid in the EU-27

NTERNATIONAL ASPECTS
As of the withdrawal date, the United Kingdom is no longer within the scope of the Interbus Agreement13 on the international occasional carriage of passengers by coach and bus, the very similar ASOR Agreement of 1982, 14 as well as the Agreement between the European Community and the Swiss Confederation on the Carriage of Goods and Passengers by Rail and Road.15
Preparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for Union and national authorities, but also for private parties.
The website of the Commission on road transport (https://ec.europa.eu/transport/modes/road_en) provide for general information concerning the rules for road transport in the Union. These pages will be updated with further information, where necessary.
European Commission
Directorate-General for Mobility and Transport                                                  12
Regulation (EC) No 1073/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 21 October 2009 on common rules for access to the international market for coach and bus services, and amending Regulation (EC) No 561/2006, OJ L 300 14.11.2009, p. 88
13
Agreement on the international occasional carriage of passengers by coach and bus (INTERBUS) of 30 June 2001, OJ
321, 26.11.2002, p. 13
14
Agreement on the International Carriage of Passengers by Road by means of Occasional Coach and Bus Services (ASOR) of 26 May 1982, OJ
230, 5
.1982, p. 39
15
OJ
114, 30.04.2002, p. 91

EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL FOR MOBILITY AND TRANSPORT
Brussels, 27 February 2018
OTICE TO STAKEHOLDER
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND EU RULES IN THE FIELD OF MARITIME TRANSPORT The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. This means that
unless a ratified withdrawal agreement
establishes another date, all Union primary and secondary law will cease to apply to the United Kingdom from 30 March 2019, 00:00h (CET) ('the withdrawal date').
The United Kingdom will then become a 'third country'.
Preparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for EU and national authorities but also for private parties
In view of the considerable uncertainties, in particular concerning the content of a possible withdrawal agreement, all operators are reminded of certain legal repercussions stemming from currently applicable rules of Union law in the field of maritime transport when the United Kingdom becomes a third country.  Subject to any transitional arrangement that may be contained in a possible withdrawal agreement, as of the withdrawal date, the EU rules in the field of maritime transport no longer apply to the United Kingdom. This has in particular the following consequences in the different areas of Union law in the field of maritime transport:

Negotiations are ongoing with the United Kingdom with a view to reaching a withdrawal agreement.
Furthermore, in accordance with Article 50(3) of the Treaty on European Union, the European Council, in agreement with the United Kingdom, may unanimously decide that the Treaties cease to apply at a later date.
A third country is a country not member of the EU.
This notice does not address marine equipment (which is addressed in the Notice to stakeholders
Withdrawal of the United Kingdom and EU rules in the field of industrial products, https://ec.europa.eu/growth/single-market/goods_en) nor seafarer qualifications (which is addressed in the Notice to stakeholders
Withdrawal of the United Kingdom and EU rules on the minimum level of training of seafarers and the mutual recognition of seafarers' certificates, https://ec.europa.eu/transport/transport-modes/news/2017-12-11-brexit-notice-stakeholders_en).
2 1.
ARKET ACCESS  Intra-Union shipping services and third-country traffic: Regulation (EEC) No 4055/86
stipulates the freedom to provide maritime transport services between Member States, as well as between Member States and third countries, in respect of:
nationals of Member States who are established in a Member State other than that of the person for whom the services are intended
6 and
nationals of the Member States established outside the EU", or "shipping companies established outside the EU and controlled by nationals of a Member State, if their vessels are registered in that Member State in accordance with its legislation."
Persons or companies who, as of the withdrawal date
do no
meet those criteria will no longer benefit from this Regulation, notably in terms of non-discriminatory treatment as regards international maritime transport connections.  Cabotage: According to Article 1(1) of Regulation (EEC) No 3577
28, the provision of maritime transport services within EU Member States (maritime cabotage) is restricted to Community shipowners (as defined in Article 2(2) of that Regulation). As of the withdrawal date it will no longer be possible to provide maritime transport services in accordance with this Regulation
f the conditions for constituting a Community shipowner are no longer fulfilled, unless national legislation
allows access to cabotage to vessels flying the flag of a third country. 2.
ARITIME
FETY  Recognition of organisations: The withdrawal of the United Kingdom does not as such affect the recognitions by the Commission in accordance with Article 4 of Regulation (EC) No 391/200910 of organisations referred to in Article 2(c) of that Regulation. However, according to Article
of Regulation (EC) No 391/2009 Recognised Organisations are to be assessed on a regular basis (at least every two years) by the Commission, together with the Member State that initially
Council Regulation (EEC) No 4055/86 of 22 December 1986 applying the principle of freedom to provide services to maritime transport between Member States and between Member States and third countries, OJ L 378, 31.12.1986, p.1
6
Article 1(1) of Regulation (EEC) No 4055/86.
Article 1(2) of Regulation (EEC) No 4055/86.
Council Regulation (EEC) No 3577/92 of 7 December 1992 applying the principle of freedom to provide services to maritime transport within Member States (maritime cabotage), OJ L 364, 12.12.1992, p.7.
E.g. the legislation of Denmark, Ireland, Belgium, and the Netherlands
10
Regulation (EC) No 391/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 April 2009 on common rules and standards for ship inspection and survey organisations, OJ L
1, 28
.2009, p.
.
3 submitted the request for recognition for the organisation in question. This also applies to the organisation
which had initially been recognised by the relevant Member State and which now enjoy recognition pursuant to Article 15 of Regulation (EC) No 391/2009. As of the withdrawal date
the United Kingdom will no longer be in a position to participate in the assessments carried out in accordance with Article 8 of Regulation (EC) No 391/2009 of organisations initially recognised by it
With respect to this procedural requirement, the Commission is considering the necessary and appropriate steps to allow for the assessment in accordance with the terms of the Regulation
Port State Control
Directive 2009/16/EC11 sets out the EU Port State Control system. The Directive requires Member States to inspect foreign ships in ports by Port State Control officers for the purpose of verifying that the condition of a ship and its equipment comply with the requirements of international conventions
and that the vessel is manned and operated in compliance with applicable international law. Directive 2009/16/EC also requires verification of compliance with a number of other EU-law based requirements,12 including insurance certificates under Directive 2009/20/EC.13 While EU-27 Member States will continue to verify United Kingdom ships calling to EU ports
as of the withdrawal date, the Port State Control inspection system set out in Directive 2009/16/EC no longer applies in the United Kingdom.14 Relations between the United Kingdom and the EU in respect of Port State Control will be governed by the Paris Memorandum of Understanding on Port State Control.15  Operations of passenger ships: According to Articles 4
5 and 6 of Council Directive 1999/35/EC,16 host States
as defined in that Directive
are to carry out mandatory inspections to provide for assurance of safe operation of regular ro-ro ferry and high-speed passenger craft services to or from ports of the EU. While these ships will continue to be subject to such inspections in the EU-27 Member States to or from which they operate, as of the withdrawal date, the United                                                  11
Directive 2009/16/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 April 2009 on port State control, OJ L 131, 28.5.2009, p. 57. 12
Article 13 and Annex IV of Directive 2009/16/EC. 13
Point 41 of Annex IV to Directive 2009/16/EC and Article 4(1) of Directive 2009/20/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 April 2009 on the insurance of shipowners for maritime claims, OJ L 131/128, 28.05.2009. 14
Note that, as of the withdrawal date, United Kingdom flagged ships will no longer be required to carry the inventory of hazardous materials that complies with Article 5(2) of Regulation 1257/2013 on ship recycling. However, this obligation becomes applicable again to ships flying the flag of a third country as of 31 December 2020(Articles 12 and 32(2)(b) of Regulation (EU) No 1257/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 20 November 2013 on ship recycling, OJ L 330, 10.12.2013, p. 1). The certificate will be verified in accordance with Point 49 of Annex IV to Directive 2009/16/EC. 15
All EU Member States with sea ports, including the United Kingdom, are members of the Paris Memorandum of Understanding.
16
Council Directive 1999/35 of 29 April 1999 on a system of mandatory surveys for the safe operation of regular ro-ro ferry and high-speed passenger craft services, OJ L 138, 1.6.1999, p. 1. Note that this Directive is being repealed and replaced by Directive (EU) 2017/2110 that entered into force on 20 December 2017 and will have as deadline for transposition 21 December 2019 (after the withdrawal date).
4 Kingdom will no longer have to carry out such inspections in accordance with Directive 1999/35/EC
Safety of fishing vesse
:
ccording to Article 3(5) of Directive 97/70/EC,17 Member States shall prohibit fishing vessels flying the flag of a third country from operating in their internal waters or territorial sea or landing their catch in their ports unless they are certified by their flag State administration to comply with the requirements referred to in Article 3(
-(4) and Article 5 of Directive 97/70/EC, namely the technical provisions of that Directive.  In addition, under Article 7(3) of Directive 97/70/EC fishing vessels flying the flag of a third State shall be subject to control by
Member State when in its ports, in order to verify their compliance with the Torremolinos Protocol,18 once it has entered into force. The Commission services stand ready to provide further clarifications to interested stakeholders. The website of the Commission on maritime transport (https://ec.europa.eu/transport/modes/maritime_en) provide for general information. These pages will be updated with further information, where necessary. Further information on other maritime safety related questions is available on European Maritime website at the following link: https://www.emsa.europa.eu/
European Commission
Directorate-General for Mobility and Transport                                                  17
Council Directive 97/70/EC of 11 December 1997 setting up a harmonised safety regime for fishing vessels of 24 metres in length and over, OJ L 34, 9.2.1998, p. 1
18
A number of provisions of the Torremolinos Protocol were updated and amended by the Cape Town Agreement of 2012 on the Implementation of the Provisions of the 1993 Protocol relating to the Torremolinos International Convention for the Safety of Fishing Vessels
EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL FOR MOBILITY AND TRANSPORT
Brussels, 7 March 2018
OTICE TO STAKEHOLDERS
WITHDRAWAL OF THE
NITED
INGDOM AND EU RULES IN THE FIELD OF INLAND WATERWAYS The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. This means that
unless a ratified withdrawal agreement
establishes another date
all Union primary and secondary law will cease to apply to the United Kingdom from 30 March 2019, 00:00h (CET) ('the withdrawal date').
The United Kingdom will then become a 'third country'.
Preparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for EU and national authorities, but also for private parties.
In view of the considerable uncertainties, in particular concerning the content of a possible withdrawal agreement, all inland waterway transport operators are reminded of legal repercussions
which need to be considered when the United Kingdom becomes a third country
Subject to any transitional arrangement that may be contained in a possible withdrawal agreement, as of the withdrawal date, the EU rules in the field of inland waterway transport no longer apply to the United Kingdom. This has in particular the following consequences:
According to Article 2 of Council Regulation (EC) No 1356/96
operators carrying out international transport of goods or passengers by inland
Negotiations are ongoing with the United Kingdom with a view to reaching a withdrawal agreement.
Furthermore, in accordance with Article 50(3) of the Treaty on European Union, the European Council, in agreement with the United Kingdom, may unanimously decide that the Treaties cease to apply at a later date.
A third country is a country not member of the EU.
This notice does not address the issue of technical requirements for inland waterway vessels, under Directive 2006/87/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 December 2006 laying down technical requirements for inland waterway vessels (OJ L 389, 30.12.2006, p. 1). Regarding these rules, the United Kingdom has authorised a derogation in accordance with Article 7(1) of that Directive. A similar possibility for derogation is contained in Article 24(1) of Directive 2016/1629 (OJ L 252, 16.9.2016, p. 118), repealing Directive 2006/87/EC with effect from 7 October 2018

Council Regulation (EC) No 1356/96 of 8 July 1996 on common rules applicable to the transport of goods or passengers by inland waterway between Member States with a view to establishing freedom to provide such transport services, OJ L 175, 13.7.1996, p. 7
2 waterway in the Union must be established in an EU Member State. Vessels used for such transport operations must also be registered in an EU Member State. As of the withdrawal date, operators that have their establishment in the United Kingdom and/or vessels registered in the United Kingdom will no longer fulfil these requirements and will therefore no longer have access to the internal inland waterway transport market of the Union.
According to Article 1 of Council Regulation (EEC) No 3921/91
carriers of goods or passengers by inland waterway established in a
EU Member State are entitled to carry out cabotage activities in another Member State.  For these activities, owners of vessels must be EU Member States nationals and domiciled in an EU Member State
Owners who are legal persons must have their registered place of business in an EU Member State and be majority owned by EU Member State nationals. As of the withdrawal date, carriers established in the United Kingdom and vessels' owners who are United Kingdom nationals or legal persons that have their registered place of business in the United Kingdom will no longer fulfil these requirements and will therefore no longer be entitled to carry out cabotage activities within the Union
According to Article 1(4) of Council Directive 96/50
issued by EU Member States in conformity with that Directive shall be valid for all waterways of the respective group in the Union. As of the withdrawal date, boatmasters certificates issued by the UK in conformity with Directive 96/50 will no longer be valid for any waterway within the Union. The website of the Commission on inland waterway transport (https://ec.europa.eu/transport/modes/inland_en) provide
general information. These pages will be updated with further information, where necessary.
European Commission
Directorate-General for Mobility and Transport
Council Regulation (EEC) No 3921/91 of 16 December 1991 laying down the conditions under which non-resident carriers may transport goods or passengers by inland waterway within a Member State, OJ L 373, 31.12.1991, p. 1
7
Council Directive 96/50/EC of 23 July 1996 on the harmonization of the conditions for obtaining national boatmasters' certificates for the carriage of goods and passengers by inland waterway in the Community
OJ L 235, 17.9.1996, p. 31
EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL FOR MOBILITY AND TRANSPORT
Brussels, 23 October 2018 Replaces the notice published on 5 July 2018
OTICE TO STAKEHOLDER
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND EU RULES IN THE FIELD OF AVIATION SECURITY AND MARITIME SECURITY The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. This means that, unless a ratified withdrawal agreement
establishes another date, all Union primary and secondary law will cease to apply to the United Kingdom from 30 March 2019, 00:00h (CET) ('the withdrawal date').
The United Kingdom will then become a 'third country'.
Preparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for EU and national authorities but also for private parties.  In view of the considerable uncertainties, in particular concerning the content of a possible withdrawal agreement, EU airport operators, operators providing services at EU airports and entities providing goods and/or services to or through EU airports (aviation security), as well as operators of maritime transport services (maritime security) are reminded of legal repercussions, which need to be considered when the United Kingdom becomes a third country
Subject to any transitional arrangement that may be contained in a possible withdrawal agreement, as of the withdrawal date, the EU rules in the field of aviation security and maritime security no longer apply to the United Kingdom. This has in particular the following consequences:

Negotiations are ongoing with the United Kingdom with a view to reaching a withdrawal agreement.
Furthermore, in accordance with Article 50(3) of the Treaty on European Union, the European Council, in agreement with the United Kingdom, may unanimously decide that the Treaties cease to apply at a later date.
A third country is a country not member of the EU.
Stakeholder
are reminded that Commission services have published notices on other aspects related to the withdrawal of the United Kingdom and the consequences for air transport and maritime transport, including transport safety, access, and passenger rights. All notices are available here: https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness_en.
1.
VIATION SECURITY Regulation (EC) No 300/2008
lays down common rules and basic standards on aviation security and procedures to monitor the implementation of the common rules and standards.
Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) No 2015/1998
lays down detailed measures for the implementation of the common basic security standards as set out in Article 4 and the Annex to Regulation (EU) No 300/2008
As of the withdrawal date, the EU aviation security rules and standards with regard to passengers, baggage, and freight arriving from a third country, particularly on transfer onto a connecting flight, will apply to passengers, baggage and freight arriving from the United Kingdom. This implies in particular the following as of the withdrawal date:  Aircraft search: In accordance with Chapter 3.1.1.3 of the Annex to Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2015/1998, an aircraft arriving into a critical part from the United Kingdom will be subjected to an aircraft security search any time after passenger disembarkation from the area to be searched and/or the unloading of the hold
This would no longer apply should the United Kingdom at one point be listed in attachment 3-B of the Annex to Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2015/1998.
Hold baggage
In accordance with Chapter 5 of the Annex to Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2015/1998, hold baggage of an inbound flight from the United Kingdom will be subject to security screening procedure when transferring onto a connecting flight. This means that before the hold baggage is loaded into an aircraft for the next flight, it has to undergo rescreening to the EU standard.
This would no longer apply should the United Kingdom at one point be listed in attachment 5-A of the Annex to Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2015/1998.

assengers and their cabin baggage
In accordance with Chapter 4 of the Annex to Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2015/1998, passengers of a flight originating from the United Kingdom will have to undergo another set of security screening procedure when transferring onto a connecting flight.
This would no longer apply should the United Kingdom at one point be listed in attachment 4-B of the Annex to Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2015/1998.
Regulation (EC) No 300/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 March 2008 on common rules in the field of civil aviation security, OJ L 97 9.4.2008, p. 72
6
Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2015/1998 of 5 November 2015 laying down detailed measures for the implementation of the common basic standards on aviation security, OJ L 299, 14.11.2015, p. 1.
Cargo and mail  Approval of Regulated Agents and Known Consignors in the EU: In accordance with Chapters 6.3 and 6.4 of the Annex to Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) No 2015/1998, EU-based entities approved as Regulated Agents or Known Consignors by an EU Member State shall be recognised in all EU Member States.
The recognition in all Member States of approvals by the appropriate authority of the United Kingdom will lapse as of the withdrawal date. Regulated Agents and Known Consignors approved by the appropriate authority of the United Kingdom will no longer be part of the EU secure supply chain.

argo and mail and airport and in-flight supplies  EU Aviation Security Validators' approvals: In accordance with Chapter 11.6 of the Annex to Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) No 2015/1998 (point 11.6.4.2), natural and legal persons approved as EU aviation security validators by an EU Member State shall be recognised in all EU Member States.
The recognition in all Member States of EU aviation security validators approvals by the appropriate authority of the United Kingdom will lapse as of the withdrawal date. Holders of such approvals will no longer be empowered to carry out EU aviation security validations in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 2015/1998.
Cargo and mail
Designation of air carriers: In accordance with Chapter 6.8.1 of the Annex to Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2015/1998, air carriers
no matter if established in the EU, in the United Kingdom, or in another third country
that transport air cargo and mail from an airport located in the United Kingdom into the EU will have to be designated by the appropriate authority of an EU-27 Member State as "Air Cargo or Mail Carrier operating into the European Union from a Third Country Airport" (ACC3) and ensure implementation of certain security measures. The ACC3 designation is based on a process called EU aviation security validation, consisting of an assessment of -site verification of the security operations at the location (departure airport or warehouse).
This would no longer apply should the United Kingdom at one point be listed in attachments 6-Fi or 6-Fii of the Annex to Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2015/1998.
Cargo and mail
Designation of the entities and operators part of the supply chain of the ACC3 air carrier: In accordance with Chapters 6.8.4 and 6.8.5 of the Annex to Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2015/1998, entities and operators part of the supply chain of the ACC3 air carrier mentioned above will have to be designated as "Third Country Known Consignors" (KC3) or "Third Country Regulated Agent" (RA3
by the appropriate authority of an EU-27 Member State. The RA3/KC3 designations are based on a process called EU security programme and an on-site verification of the security operations at the location (departure airport or warehouse).
4 This would no longer apply should the United Kingdom at one point be listed in attachment
Fi or 6-Fii of the Annex to Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2015/1998.
Cargo and mail
Recognition of ACC3/KC3/RA3 designations: According to Chapters 6.3.1.6, 6.4.1.6, 6.8.1.5, and 6.8.4.7 of the Annex to Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2015/1998, ACC3/KC3/RA3 designations by the appropriate authorit
of an EU Member State shall be recognised in all EU Member States.
The recognition in all Member States of designations by the appropriate authority of the United Kingdom will lapse as of the withdrawal date. As a result, all carriers and cargo operators in third countries that have been designated by the authority of the United Kingdom will be required to hold, as of the withdrawal date, the ACC3/KC3/RA3 status accorded by the appropriate authority of an EU-27 Member State
Regulated suppliers: In accordance with Chapter 8.1.3 of the Annex to Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2015/1998
regulated suppliers (some airport suppliers as well as in-flight suppliers) have to be approved by the appropriate authority. According to Chapter 8.1.3.5 of Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2015/1998, the approval of a regulated supplier by an EU Member State shall be recognised in all EU Member States.
The recognition in all Member States of approvals by the appropriate authority of the United Kingdom will lapse as of the withdrawal date. As a result, regulated suppliers approved by the appropriate authority of the United Kingdom will be required to hold, as of the withdrawal date, the approval of an appropriate authority of an EU-27 Member State. 2.
ARITIME SECURITY Regulation (EC) No 725/2004 on enhancing ship and port facility security
and Directive 2005/65/EC on enhancing port security
set out the EU rules on maritime security.   Article
of Regulation (EC) No 725/2004 requires the competent authority for maritime security of the Member State to request ships announcing their intention to enter
port to provide certain security information. According to Article 7(1),(2) of Regulation (EC) No 725/2004, Member States can request each other, for international scheduled services operated between them, to exempt these services from providing this mandatory security information. As of the withdrawal date, this possibility, as provided by Regulation (EC) No 725/2004, no longer exists for the United Kingdom. This means that, as of the withdrawal date, all scheduled services falling within the scope of Article 6 of
Regulation (EC) No 725/2004 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 31 March 2004 on enhancing ship and port facility security, OJ L 129, 29.4.2004, p.
.
Directive 2005/65/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 October 2005 on enhancing port security, OJ L 310, 25.11.2005, p
28
5 Regulation (EC) No 725/2004, such as ferry links between the United Kingdom and EU Member States, will be subjected to the mandatory provision of security information set out therein.
According to Article 16(2) of Directive 2005/65/EC, the personnel carrying out security inspections or handling confidential information (including the personnel of recognised security organisations, see Article 11 of Directive 2005/65/EC) requires a security vetting of the Member State of which the person concerned is a national. This means that United Kingdom personnel (thus holding a security clearance from the United Kingdom) can no longer carry out the security inspections referred to in this Directive. The same applies for inspections under Regulation (EC) No 725/2004 (for International Ship and Port Facility Security (ISPS) compliance), pursuant to Article 12 thereof
The website
of the Commission on aviation security
https://ec.europa.eu/transport/modes/air/security_en
and maritime security (https://ec.europa.eu/transport/modes/maritime/security_en) provide for general information concerning the rules for transport security in the Union. These pages will be updated with further information, where necessary. European Commission
Directorate-General for Mobility and Transport
EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL FOR MOBILITY AND TRANSPORT
Brussels, 10 July 2018 Annuls and replaces the notice of  27 February 2018
OTICE TO STAKEHOLDERS
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND EU RULES IN THE FIELD OF RAIL TRANSPORT The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. This means that
unless a ratified withdrawal agreement
establishes another date, all Union primary and secondary law will cease to apply to the United Kingdom from 30 March 2019, 00:00h (CET) ('the withdrawal date').
The United Kingdom will then become a 'third country'.
Preparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for EU and national authorities but also for private parties.  In view of the considerable uncertainties, in particular concerning the content of a possible withdrawal agreement, all stakeholders are reminded of legal repercussions, which need to be considered when the United Kingdom becomes a third country
Subject to any transitional arrangement that may be contained in a possible withdrawal agreement, as of the withdrawal date, the EU rules in the field of rail transport no longer apply to the United Kingdom. This has in particular the following consequences in the different areas of rail transport: 1.
ANAGEMENT AND USE OF RAILWAY INFRASTRUCTURE According to Chapter III of Directive 2012/34/E
establishing a single European railway area
in order to provide rail transport services, railway undertakings need a licence: they are entitled to apply for it in the EU Member State where they are established. The licence is valid throughout the territory of the Union, as long as the undertaking fulfils the obligations laid down in Chapter III of Directive
Negotiations are ongoing with the United Kingdom with a view to reaching a withdrawal agreement.
Furthermore, in accordance with Article 50(3) of the Treaty on European Union, the European Council, in agreement with the United Kingdom, may unanimously decide that the Treaties cease to apply at a later date.
A third country is a country not member of the EU.
Directive 2012/34/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 21 November 2012 establishing a single European railway area, OJ L 343 14.12.2012, p. 32

2012/34/EU. As of the withdrawal date, licences issued by the United Kingdom will no longer be valid in the EU-27. Railway undertakings holding such a licence and wishing to continue operating in the EU-27 as of the withdrawal date will have to apply for a new licence in an EU-27 Member State in accordance with Chapter III of Directive 2012/34/E
Railway undertakings providing cross-border services between the United Kingdom and the EU-27 and wishing to continue after the withdrawal date, will have to comply with the legal requirements applicable both in the EU-27 and the United Kingdom. These undertakings will therefore have to ensure that they have a licence valid in the EU-27 for the sections of the cross-border services located in the territory of the EU-27. It follows from Article 17(1) of Directive 2012/34/EU that establishment in one of the EU-27 Member States is a precondition for acquiring an EU-27 licence. 2.
AILWAY SAFETY
According to Article 10 of Directive 2004/49/EC on safety on the Community's railways
access to railway infrastructure in the Union by a railway undertaking is subject to having obtained a safety certificate issued by a Member State. As of the withdrawal date, safety certificates delivered in the United Kingdom pursuant to Article 10 of the Directive will no longer be valid in the EU-27
Railway undertaking
holding such a certificate and wanting to continue operating in the EU-27 as of the withdrawal date will have to apply for a new certificate in an EU-27 Member State
in accordance with Article 10 of Directive 2004/49/EC
According to Article 14a(4) of Directive 2004/49/EC, each entity in charge of maintenance (ECM) of freight wagons is subject to a certification requirement. As of the withdrawal date, certificates issued by the United Kingdom will no longer be valid in the EU-27.
ECMs holding a certificate delivered by the United Kingdom and wishing to continue their professional activities in the European Union will have to apply for a certificate in an EU-27 Member State. In addition, as of the withdrawal date, ECMs may apply for a certificate according to the legal framework of the Convention concerning international carriage by rail (COTIF), to which the 26 EU Member States with a railway system
are parties

Directive 2004/49/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 29 April 2004 on safety on the Community's railways (Railway Safety Directive), OJ L 164, 30.4.2004, p. 44
6
More specifically, they will need a safety certificate part A issued by a EU-27 Member State in order to operate in the EU and safety certificates part B from each of the Member States in which they would operate.
This also holds for certificates by ECM certification bodies recognised by the United Kingdom or accredited by the United Kingdom accreditation body in accordance with Article 10 of Regulation (EU) No 445/2011 on a system of certification of entities in charge of maintenance for freight wagons and amending Regulation (EC) No 653/2007 (OJ L 122, 11.5.2011, p. 22).
Malta and Cyprus do not have a railway system

3.
AILWAY INTEROPERABILITY10
lacing on the market of railway products covered by Directive 2008/57/EC: For those products, the European Union's Technical Specifications for Interoperability set out the applicable conformity assessment procedures and whether, for each of them, a third party intervention (Notified Body or Designated Body) is required or not. In terms of the placing on the market of such products, this notice should be read in conjunction with the generic notice to economic operators subject to Union legislation in the field of industrial products,11 particularly its section 2 on conformity assessment procedures and Notified Bodies. The consequences of the withdrawal of the United Kingdom from the EU set out in the generic notice fully apply to certificates issued by bodies notified (in the case of Notified Bodies) or designated (in the case of Designated Bodies) by the United Kingdom (hereafter "Notified Bodies/Designated Bodies in the United Kingdom"). The following paragraphs deal with the specific cases concerning the placing on the market and use of interoperability constituents and the placing in service of vehicles and subsystems
Placing on the market and use of interoperability constituents: According to Articles 10 and 13(2) of Directive 2008/57/EC on the interoperability of the rail system within the Community,12 the placing on the market of an interoperability constituent may require an assessment of conformity/suitability for use established by
Notified Body. Where an assessment established by a Notified Body is required, the consequences of the withdrawal of the United Kingdom from the EU set out in the generic notice on industrial products referred to in the preceding paragraph fully apply
An interoperability constituent placed on the market before the withdrawal date with a certificate of conformity/suitability for use issued by a Notified Body in the United Kingdom can be used, during the duration of validity of the certificates of conformity/suitability for use, in subsystems or vehicles the placing in service of which has been authorised before the withdrawal date.
Placing in service of vehicles and subsystems: According to Article 21 of Directive 2008/57/EC, before being used on a network, a railway vehicle has to be authorised to be placed in service by the national safety authority which is
See Article 15(2) of Appendix G to COTIF, and the Uniform Rules set out in accordance with that Article, in relation to the ECM certification in the COTIF framework. For the interaction between the ECM certifications pursuant to Directive 2004/49/EC and to the COTIF framework, see Article 3a(5) of the same Appendix
10
The principles set out in this section will also apply in the framework of Directive (EU) 2016/797 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 May 2016 on the interoperability of the rail system within the European Union (recast) (OJ L 138, 26.5.2016, p. 44) when the relevant provisions become applicable in the respective EU Member States
11
https://ec.europa.eu/growth/single-market/goods_en. 12
Directive 2008/57/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 17 June 2008 on the interoperability of the rail system within the Community, OJ L 191, 18.7.2008, p. 1.
4 competent for this network in accordance with that Directive. Authorisations for placing in service of vehicles pursuant to Article 21 of Directive 2008/57/EC delivered in the EU-27 before the withdrawal date will retain their validity after the withdrawal date even if they have been authorised based on certificates of verification issued by Notified Bodies/Designated Bodies in the United Kingdom. The same applies to authorisations for placing in service of subsystems according to Articles 15 and 20 of Directive 2008/57/EC. As of the withdrawal date, however, authorisations for placing in service pursuant to Articles 15, 20 and 21 of Directive 2008/57/EC shall be based on certificates of verification issued by Notified Bodies/Designated Bodies in the EU-27
As of the withdrawal date, the use of railway material authorised in the United Kingdom in international traffic in the EU will be governed by COTIF, and in particular the Appendices G13 and F14 thereto
4.
RAIN DRIVER CERTIFICATION  Directive 2007/59/EC15 lays down the conditions and procedures for the certification of train drivers operating locomotives and trains on the railway system in the Union. In particular, it requires that the train driver obtains a specific licence and a specific certificate. The licence is issued by a competent authority of a Member State while the certificate is issued by the railway undertakings and infrastructure managers. According to Article 7, a licence issued by a Member State is valid throughout the territory of the Union while the certificate is valid on those infrastructures and rolling stock identified on it. As of the withdrawal date, licenses and certificates for train drivers issued in the United Kingdom will no longer be valid in the EU-27.
rain drivers with a licence/certificate issued in the United Kingdom and working in another Member State should take the necessary steps in order to obtain certification documents valid in the EU-27 as of the withdrawal date. Therefore, railway undertakings or infrastructure managers in the EU employing train drivers with certification documents issued in the United Kingdom are invited to inform these persons of the need to obtain new certification documents valid in the EU-27 as of the withdrawal date
Railway undertakings providing cross-border services between the United Kingdom and the EU-27 and wishing to continue after the withdrawal date, will have to ensure that the drivers on the sections of such cross-border services                                                  13
"Uniform rules concerning the technical admission of railway material used in international traffic". For the interaction between the vehicle authorisations pursuant to Directive 2008/57/EC and pursuant to the COTIF framework, see Article 3a of Appendix G to COTIF. 14
"Uniform rules concerning the validation of technical standards and the adoption of uniform technical prescriptions applicable to railway material intended to be used in international traffic". 15
Directive 2007/59/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 October 2007 on the certification of train drivers operating locomotives and trains on the railway system in the Community, OJ L 315, 3.12.2007, p. 51

which are located in the EU-27 territory have required licences/certificates issued in the EU-27. The website of the Commission on rail transport (https://ec.europa.eu/transport/modes/rail_en) provide
for general information concerning the rules for rail transport in the Union. These pages will be updated with further information, where necessary.
European Commission
Directorate
eneral for Mobility and Transport
EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL FOR MOBILITY AND TRANSPORT
Brussels, 11 July 2019
OTICE TO STAKEHOLDER
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND EU RULES ON TRANSPORTABLE PRESSURE EQUIPMENT The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union (TEU). Following
request by the United Kingdom, the European Council (Article 50) agreed on 11 April 2019
to extend further
the period provided for in Article 50(3) TEU until 31 October 2019.
This means that the United Kingdom will be, as of 1 November 2019 a third country

Preparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for EU and national authorities but also for private parties. In view of the uncertainties surrounding the ratification of the Withdrawal Agreement
all interested parties, and especially economic operators, are reminded of legal repercussions, which need to be considered when the United Kingdom becomes a third country
Subject to the transition period provided for in the Withdrawal Agreement,
as of the withdrawal date the EU rules on transportable pressure equipment, and in particular Directive 2010/35/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 June 2010 on
European Council Decision (EU) 2019/584, OJ L 101, 11.4.2019, p. 1.
Following a request by the United Kingdom, the European Council had decided a first extension on 22 March 2019 (European Council Decision (EU) 2019/476, OJ L 80 I, 22.3.2019, p. 1).
On 11 April 2019, following a second request for an extension by the United Kingdom, the European Council also decided that the decision to extend until 31 October 2019 would cease to apply on 31 May 2019 if the United Kingdom had not held elections to the European Parliament and had not ratified the Withdrawal Agreement by 22 May 2019. As the United Kingdom had not ratified the Withdrawal Agreement by 22 May 2019, it held European elections on 23 May 2019.
A third country is a country not member of the EU.
In addition, if the Withdrawal Agreement is ratified by both parties before that date, the withdrawal takes place on the first day of the month following the completion of the ratification procedures.
Agreement on the withdrawal of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland from the European Union and the European Atomic Energy Community, OJ C 144 I, 25
.2019, p. 1
7
It is recalled that, in order for the transition period to apply, the Withdrawal Agreement has to be ratified by the EU and the United Kingdom

transportable pressure equipment
and Directive 2008/68/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 September 2008 on the inland transport of dangerous goods9, no longer apply in the United Kingdom. This has in particular the following consequences
1. TRANSPORTABLE PRESSURE EQUIPMENT PLACED ON THE UNION (EU-27) MARKET  Directive 2010/35/EU provides for rules ensuring the safety of transportable pressure equipment made available on the EU market. Regarding the need for a certificate issued by a Notified Body established in one of the EU-27 Member States, the requirement for the authorised representative to be established within the EU-27 and the identification of the importer, please refer to the  withdrawal of the United Kingdom and EU rules in of 22 January 201810 and the related document of 1 February 2019.11 The relevant criterion to determine the extent to which there may be consequences from the UK withdrawal for a specific product covered by Directive 2010/35/EU is the date of its placing on the Union (E
27) market. According to Article 12 of Directive 2010/35/EU, transportable pressure equipment in use is subject to periodic inspections, intermediate inspections and exceptional checks in accordance with the Annexes to Directive 2008/68/EC and Chapters 3 and 4 of Directive 2010/35/EU. In order to ensure the continuity of the free movement of transportable pressure equipment in use, as of the withdrawal date
any required periodic inspections, intermediate inspections and exceptional checks will need to be performed by an EU-27 Notified Body. Article 13 of Directive 2010/35/EU provides that transportable pressure equipment manufactured and put into service before the date of implementation of Directive 1999/36/EC of 29 April 1999 on transportable pressure equipment12 (repealed by Directive 2010/35/EU) requires a reassessment of conformity in accordance with the conformity reassessment procedures set out in Annex III to Directive 2010/35/EU. As of the withdrawal date, the reassessment of conformity will need to be performed by an EU-27 Notified Body. Directive 2010/35/EU does not apply to transportable pressure equipment exclusively used for the transport of dangerous goods between the territory of the Union and that of third countries13, which is carried out in accordance with Article 4 of Directive 2008/68/E
(see Section 2 below).
OJ L 165, 30.6.2010, p. 1
9
OJ L 260, 30.9.2008, p. 13. 10
https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/file_import/industrial_products_en_1.pdf
11
https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/qa_brexit_industrial_products_en.pdf
12
OJ L 138, 1.6.1999, p. 20. 13
Article 1(4) of Directive 2010/35/EU.
3 2.
RANSPORTABLE PRESSURE EQUIPMENT USED EXCLUSIVELY FOR THE TRANSPORT OF DANGEROUS GOODS BETWEEN EU-27
EMBER STATES AND THE UK AND VICE-VERSA Directive 2008/68/EC lays down uniform rules for the safe transport of dangerous goods both within the EU and between Member State
and third countries. The annexes to Directive 2008/68/EC contain, inter alia, the technical requirements applicable to transportable pressure equipment, to which Directive 2010/35/EU refers. Directive 2008/68/EC sets up a common regime covering all aspects of the inland transport of dangerous goods based on relevant international agreements, including in particular the European Agreement concerning the International Carriage of , the Convention concerning International Carriage by Rail (COTIF), which lays down in its Appendix C Regulations RID, and the European Agreement concerning the International Carriage of Dangerous Goods by
The majority of Member States, including the United Kingdom, are contracting parties to those international agreements in their own right
although the United Kingdo
only to ADR and RID). The United Kingdom will therefore remain a contracting party to the ADR and RID agreements after its withdrawal from the EU
the transport of dangerous goods between Member States and third countries shall be authorised in so far as it complies with the requirements of the ADR, RID or ADN, unless otherwise indicated in the Annexes. This means that transportable pressure equipment complying with the requirements of the ADR or RID can normally continue to be accepted, as of the withdrawal date, for the international carriage of dangerous goods between the United Kingdom and Member States and vice-versa.14 The website of the Commission on EU rules on transport of dangerous goods (https://ec.europa.eu/transport/road_safety/topics/dangerous_goods_en) provide
general information concerning Union legislation applicable to transportable pressure equipment. These pages will be updated with further information, where necessary.
European Commission
Directorate
eneral for Mobility and Transport                                                  14
Regarding the free movement of transportable pressure equipment within the EU-27, see section 1 above.
EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL FOR MOBILITY AND TRANSPORT
Brussels, 22 July 2019
OTICE TO STAKEHOLDER
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND EU RULES ON TACHOGRAPHS IN ROAD TRANSPORT The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. Following
request by the United Kingdom, the European Council (Article 50)
greed on 11 April 2019
to extend further
the period provided for in Article 50(3) TEU until 31 October 2019.
This means that the United Kingdom will be, as of 1 November 2019 a third country

Preparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for EU and national administrations but also for private parties. In view of the uncertainties surrounding the ratification of the Withdrawal Agreement
all interested parties, and especially economic operators, are reminded of legal repercussions, which need to be considered when the United Kingdom becomes a third country
Subject to the transition period provided for in the Withdrawal Agreement,
as of the withdrawal date the EU rules on tachographs in road transport, and in particular Regulation (EU) No 165/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 4
European Council Decision (EU) 2019/584, OJ L 101, 11.4.2019, p. 1.
Following a request by the United Kingdom, the European Council had decided a first extension on 22 March 2019 (European Council Decision (EU) 2019/476, OJ L 80I, 22.3.2019, p. 1).
On 11 April 2019, following a second request for an extension by the United Kingdom, the European Council also decided that the decision to extend until 31 October 2019 would cease to apply on 31 May 2019 if the United Kingdom had not held elections to the European Parliament and had not ratified the Withdrawal Agreement by 22 May 2019. As the United Kingdom had not ratified the Withdrawal Agreement by 22 May 2019, it held European elections on 23 May 2019.
A third country is a country not member of the EU.
In addition, if the Withdrawal Agreement is ratified by both parties before that date, the withdrawal takes place on the first day of the month following the completion of the ratification procedures.
Agreement on the withdrawal of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland from the European Union and the European Atomic Energy Community, OJ, C 144 I, 25
.2019, p. 1
7
It is recalled that, in order for the transition period to apply, the Withdrawal Agreement has to be ratified by the EU and the United Kingdom

February 2014 on tachographs in road transport
no longer apply to the United Kingdom. This has in particular the following consequences
Please note: This notice does not address:

Aspects related to car type-approvals
and

Aspects related to road transport, in particular certificates of professional competence for transport operators and drivers, Community licences for international carriage of goods, and driving licences.10
This contingency  on road haulage transport, i.e. Regulation (EU) 2019/501 on common rules ensuring basic road freight and road passenger connectivity with regard to the withdrawal of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland from the Union.11 12 1.
SE OF VEHICLES (TRANSPORT OPERATIONS
IN THE EU-27 2.1. Vehicles registered in the EU-27 According to Articles 3(1) and 19 of Regulation (EU) No 165/2014, vehicles used in the EU, within the scope of that Regulation, have to be equipped with a tachograph in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 165/2014
Articles 8, 9 and 10 of Regulation (EU) No 165/2014 provide for an enhanced tachograJune 2019 onwards, it must be equipped with a smart tachograph. 2.2. Vehicles registered in the United Kingdom and providing road haulage services on the basis of the (EU) 2019/501 As of the withdrawal date, unless the Withdrawal Agreement has entered into force, Regulation (EU) 2019/501 applies. Regulation (EU) 2019/501 lays down, on the condition of reciprocity, temporary measures governing the carriage of goods by road as well as the provision of regular and special regular passenger services by United Kingdom road haulage operators and
OJ L 60, 28.2.2014, p. 1
9
Notice to stakeholders
Withdrawal of the United Kingdom and EU rules in the field of type approval of motor vehicles(https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness/preparedness-notices_en#grow). 10
Notice to stakeholders
Withdrawal of the United Kingdom and EU rules in the field of road transporthttps://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/file_import/road_transport_en.pdf).  11
OJ L 85I, 27.3.2019, p. 39
12
Regarding transport performed in the EU-27 by United Kingdom operators, o(EU) 2019/501 no longer applies, the Accord européen sur les transports routiers (AETR), to which all EU
7 Member States and the United Kingdom are a party, applies.
3 United Kingdom coach and bus service operators (henceforth referred to as
According to Article 6(c) of Regulation (EU) 2019/501
in the course of carriage of goods or passengers permitted by that Regulation, in respect of tachographs in road transport the requirements set out in Regulation (EU) No 165/2014 shall be complied with. This means that, as of the withdrawal date, tachographs in vehicles used to conduct carriage on the basis of Regulation (EU) 2019/501
have to comply with the technical requirements for tachographs set out in Regulation (EU) No 165/2014 (including the requirement for a smart tachograph if the vehicle was registered for the first time from 15 June 2019 onwards); and  may be equipped with a tachograph type-approved by the UK type-approval authority
as long as Regulation (EU) 2019/501 applies. 2.
EGISTRATION OF VEHICLES IN THE EU-27
Article 19 of Regulation (EU) No 165/2014 ensures the mutual recognition of type approvals of tachographs when the vehicle is registered in another Member State.  As of the withdrawal date, this mutual recognition stops, i.e. vehicles equipped with a (smart) tachograph type-approved by the United Kingdom can no longer be registered in the EU-27 on the basis of Regulation (EU) No 165/2014.13 3.
RIVER CARDS 3.1. Regulation (EU) No 165/2014 According to Articles 26 and 30 of Regulation (EU) No 165/2014, driver cards are issued by the competent authority of the Member State where the driver has his normal residence. As of 15 June 2019, Member States must issue tachograph cards that are fully compatible with the smart tachograph in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 165/2014 (henceforth referred to as  A driver card issued in one Member State is mutually recognised in all other Member States. 3.2. (EU) 2019/501 According to Article 6(c) of Regulation (EU) 2019/501, in the course of carriage of goods or passengers permitted by that Regulation, in respect of                                                  13
The (EU) 2019/501 does no address aspects of the registration of vehicles.
4 tachographs in road transport the requirements set out in Regulation (EU) No 165/2014 shall be complied with. This means that as of the withdrawal date, United Kingdom operators will be able to conduct carriage on the basis of Regulation (EU) 2019/501 with a smart driver card issued by the United Kingdom and as long as Regulation (EU) 2019/501 applies. 4.
RANTING TYPE-APPROVALS FOR TACHOGRAPH
According to Article 13 of Regulation (EU) No 165/2014, any type of vehicle unit, motion sensor, model record sheet or tachograph card requires a type-approval issued by a type-approval authority of a Member State.  Pursuant to Article 12(3) of Regulation (EU) No 165/2014, the application for type-approval has to be accompanied by, inter alia,   a security certificate;  a functionality certificate; and  an interoperability certificate. 3.3.
Security certificate According to the first subparagraph of Article 12(3) of Regulation (EU) No 165/2014, the security certificate is issued by a certification body recognised in accordance with that Regulation.  As of the withdrawal date, security certificates issued by a UK body14 can no longer serve to grant an EU-27 typ
approval under Regulation (EU) No 165/2014
3.4.
Functionality certificate According to the second subparagraph of Article 12(3) of Regulation (EU) No 165/2014, the functionality certificate is issued by a type-approval authority of a Member State. As of the withdrawal date, functionality certificates issued by the United Kingdom can no longer serve to grant an EU-27 type-approval under Regulation (EU) No 165/2014
3.5.
Interoperability certificate int Research Centre.15 The withdrawal of the United Kingdom does not have any impact on the validity of these interoperability certificates.                                                   14
Currently, this is the UK participant to the Mutual Recognition Agreement of Information Technology Security Evaluation Certificates
https://www.sogis.eu/documents/mra/20100107-sogis-v3.pdf), i.e. the National Technical Authority for Information Assurance (CESG) in the United Kingdom.
5 5.
ITTERS
WORKSHOPS AND VEHICLE MANUFACTURERS THAT CARRY OUT INSTALLATIONS
CHECKS
INSPECTIONS AND REPAIRS According to Articles 22(1) of Regulation (EU) No 165/2014, tachographs type-approved by an EU Member State may be installed or repaired only by fitters, workshops or vehicle manufacturers approved by Member States in accordance with that Regulation. According to Article 23 of the Regulation, any regular inspections are to be carried out by approved workshops. According to Article 6(c) of Regulation (EU) 2019/501, in the course of carriage of goods or passengers permitted by that Regulation, in respect of tachographs in road transport the requirements set out in Regulation (EU) No 165/2014 shall be complied with. This means that, as of the withdrawal date, tachographs in vehicles used to conduct carriage on the basis of Regulation (EU) 2019/501 may continue to be repaired or installed by fitters, workshops or vehicle manufacturers approved in the United Kingdom as long as that Regulation applies. The same applies to inspections carried out by workshops approved by the United Kingdom.
The website of the Commission on EU rules for tachographs (https://ec.europa.eu/transport/modes/road/social-provisions/tachograph_en) provide
general information concerning the social provisions applicable to road transport under EU law. These pages will be updated with further information, where necessary.
European Commission
Directorate
eneral for Mobility and Transport
15
On the basis of section 8.4 of Annex I C of Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2016/799 of 18 March 2016 implementing Regulation (EU) No 165/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council laying down the requirements for the construction, testing, installation, operation and repair of tachographs and their components,  OJ L 139, 26.5.2016, p. 1


Brussels, London, 28 April 2017
Brussels, 1st of February 2019  REV2
replaces the Notice to stakeholders (REV1) published on 23 January 2018
OTICE TO STAKEHOLDER
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND EU RULES FOR MEDICINAL PRODUCTS FOR HUMAN USE AND VETERINARY MEDICINAL PRODUCTS The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. This means that as from 30 March 2019, 00:00h (CET)
the United Kingdom will be a third country
Preparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for EU and national authorities but also for private parties.  In view of the uncertainties surrounding the ratification of the Withdrawal Agreement, all interested parties, and especially economic operators, are reminded of legal repercussions, which need to be considered when the United Kingdom becomes a third country
Subject to the transition period provided for in the draft Withdrawal Agreement,
as of the withdrawal date, the EU rules in the field of medicinal products for human and veterinary use no longer apply to the United Kingdom. This has
in particular
the following consequences in the different areas of EU law on medicinal products
EU law requires that marketing authorisation holder
are established in the EU (or EEA)


n accordance with Article 50(3) of the Treaty on European Union, the European Council, in agreement with the United Kingdom, may unanimously decide that the Treaties cease to apply at a later date.
A third country is a country not member of the EU.
Cf. Part four of the draft Agreement on the withdrawal of the United Kingdom of Great Bri
in and Northern Ireland from the European Union and the European Atomic Energy Community, as agreed at negotiator's level on 14 November 2018 (https://ec.europa.eu/commission/publications/draft-agreement-withdrawal-uk-eu-agreed-negotiators-level-14-november-2018-including-text-article-132_en)  EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL FOR HEALTH AND FOOD SAFETY
2  Some activities must be performed in the EU (or EEA), related for example to pharmacovigilance, batch release etc. Marketing authorisation holders may be required to adapt processes and to consider changes to the terms of the marketing authorisation in order to ensure its continuous validity and exploitation, once the United Kingdom has left the Union.
arketing authorisation holders will need to act sufficiently in advance to avoid any impact on the continuous supply of medicines for human and veterinary use within the European Union. In particular, the Commission and the European Medicines Agency expect marketing authorisation holders to prepare and proactively screen authorisations they hold for the need for any changes
The necessary transfer or variation requests will need to be submitted in due time
considering the procedural timelines foreseen in the regulatory framework.
The Commission and the European Medicines Agency have provided detailed Q&As, which are continuously updated
The website
of the Commission (https://ec.europa.eu/health/human-use_en) and of the European Medicines Agency (https://www.ema.europa.eu/en/about-us/united-kingdoms-withdrawal-european-union-brexit) provide additional information. For products authorised in decentralised or mutual recognition procedures
additional information will be provided through the websites of the Coordination Groups. These pages will be updated with further information, where necessary.
European Commission
irectorate
eneral Health and Food Safety European Medicines Agency


EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL FOR HEALTH AND FOOD SAFETY

Rev
, 1 February 201
Questions and Answers related to the United Kingdom's withdrawal from the European Union with regard to the medicinal products for human and veterinary use within the framework of the Centralised Procedure
This list of Questions and Answers (Q&As) complements the "Notice to stakeholders
withdrawal of the United Kingdom and EU rules for medicinal products for human use and veterinary medicinal products".
(NEW)This list of Q&As addresses a situation where the United Kingdom becomes a third country on 30 March 2019 ("the withdrawal date") without a withdrawal agreement and hence without a transition period provided for in the draft Withdrawal Agreement.  This list has been drafted jointly by the Directorate-General for Health and Food Safety of the European Commission and EMA. This version is a
update of the initial list of Q&As published on 31 May 2017 as subsequently amended and it replaces all previous versions of Q&As. The new text introduced in this version of Q&As "Rev
" is indicated by the word "NEW". The Q&As may be further updated and complemented in the future
The advice below applies equally to medicinal products for human or veterinary use, unless otherwise indicated in the heading to the question. 1. What if I am a marketing authorisation holder established in the UK? According to Article 2 of Regulation (EC) No 726/2004 the marketing authorisation holder must be established in the Union. Through the EEA Agreement this is extended to include also Norway, Iceland and Liechtenstein. For centrally authorised medicinal products the marketing authorisation holder will therefore normally need to transfer its marketing authorisation to a holder established in the Union (EEA) (see Commission Regulation (EC) 2141/96 and EMA Q&A on transfer). This means that the addressee of the marketing authorisation decision changes to the new addressee
The transfer of the marketing authorisation must be fully completed and implemented by the marketing authorisation holder before 30 March 2019.
1
https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness/preparedness-notices_en#sante

1a. What if I am an applicant established in the UK?
ny marketing authorisation applicant must be established in the Union (EEA). Therefore, for marketing authorisation applications (MAAs) that are expected to receive a Commission Decision after 29 March 2019, applicants established in the UK will need to change to a non-UK applicant established in the Union (EEA) before 30 March 2019. It is strongly recommended that applicants established in the UK consider such change, where possible, in advance of the submission of the MAA
2. What if I am an orphan designation holder established in the UK
(for medicines for human use
According to Article 2 of Regulation (EC) No 141/2000 the sponsor of an orphan medicinal product designation must be established in the Union (EEA)
For designated orphan medicinal products the holder will therefore need to transfer its designation to a holder established in the Union (EEA
(see Checklist for sponsors applying for the transfer of Orphan Medicinal Product (OMP) designation and the corresponding template) or it will need to change its place of establishment to a Member State of the Union (or EEA) and submit the corresponding documentation through a change of name and/or address of the orphan designation holder procedure provided the legal entity remain
the same (see Guideline on the format and content of applications for designation as orphan medicinal products and on the transfer of designations from one sponsor to another, 27.03.2014). 3. What if I am a UK company with a MUMS (Minor Use Minor Species/limited market) status for my product? (for veterinary medicines
According to Article 79 of Regulation (EC) No 726/2004, the Management Board of the European Medicines Agency should, in the case of veterinary products which have limited markets, or in the case of veterinary medicinal products intended for diseases with a regional distribution, adopt the necessary measures to provide assistance to companies at the time of submission of their applications. This activity supports applicants for marketing authorisations, which in accordance with the general rules have to be established in the Union (EEA) (see Question 1a above).  If the sponsor/applicant is established in the UK, the MUMS incentives provided on the basis of Article 79 of Regulation (EC) No 726/2004 would no longer be applicable with effect from the date of thcannot seek and receive MUMS/limited market classification in the Union (EEA). However, MUMS/limited market classification is connected to the product/indication and therefore transferable together with the product.  To formally acknowledge the transfer, the EMA requires a letter from the original sponsor/applicant officially informing the EMA of the transfer of the classification product and the MUMS/limited market classification from the original sponsor/applicant to a sponsor/ applicant established in the Union (EEA). This letter should state the document reference number of the MUMS outcome letter confirming the MUMS classification.  For already authorised MUMS/limited market veterinary medicinal products it is important to note that a transfer of marketing authorisation does not include a transfer of an MUMS/limited designation as this is subject to a different procedure. Therefore, for those authorised MUMS/limited market veterinary medicinal products the marketing authorisation holder needs to ation (see above). The five year period of validity for MUMS/limited market classification is not affected by the transfer of classification


4. What if my Qualified Person for Pharmacovigilance (QPPV) resides and carries out his/her tasks in the UK?  According to Article 8 of Directive 2001/83/EC and Article 74 of Directive 2001/82/EC
the qualified person responsible for pharmacovigilance must reside and carry out his/her tasks in a Member State of the Union (EEA). The QPPV will therefore need to change his/her place of residence and carry out his/her tasks in the Union (EEA) or a new QPPV residing and carrying out his/her tasks in the Union (EEA) will need to be appointed. Changes in the QPPV, including contact details (telephone, and fax numbers, postal address and email address) may, for medicinal products for human use, be updated through the Article 57 database only (without the need for a variation) (see Variation Guideline C.I.
. Regarding medicinal products for veterinary use the changes should be updated through a variation (see Variation Guideline (2013/C 223/01), classification C.I.9)
5. What if my Pharmacovigilance System Master File is located in the UK (PSMF)
(for medicines for human use
According to Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) No 520/2012, the PSMF must be located within the Union (EEA). The supervisory authority for pharmacovigilance is the competent authority of the Member State in which the pharmacovigilance system master file is located
The marketing authorisation holder will therefore need to change the location of the PSMF to a Member State within the Union (EEA). Changes to the location of the PSMF (street, city, postcode, country) may be updated through the Article 57 database only (without the need for a variation) (see Variation Guideline (2013/ C 223/01), classification C.I.8)
6. What if my manufacturing site of the active substance is located in the UK?
As of the date of the withdrawal of the UK from the Union, active substances manufactured in the UK will be considered imported active substances. Directive 2001/83/EC  and Directive 2001/82/EC
tate that manufacturing authorisation holders are obliged to use, as starting materials, only active substances that have been manufactured in accordance with the detailed guidelines on GMP for starting materials.  In addition, pursuant to Article 46b(2) of Directive 2001/83/EC, active substances for medicinal products for human use shall only be imported in the Union (EEA) if, inter alia, the active substances are accompanied by a written confirmation from the competent authority of the exporting third country which, as regards the plant manufacturing the exported active substance, confirms that the standards of good manufacturing practice and control of the plant are equivalent to those in the Union (EEA)
7. What if my manufacturing site of the finished product is located in the UK?
As of the date of the withdrawal of the UK from the Union, medicinal products manufactured in the UK will be considered imported medicinal products. The competent authorities of the Union (EEA) shall ensure that the import of medicinal products into their territory is subject to an authorisation in accordance with Article 40(3) of Directive 2001/83/EC and Article 44(3) Of Directive 2001/82/EC. The authorisation is granted when a number of conditions
as defined in Articles 41 and 42 of Directive 2001/83/EC and Articles 45 and 46 of Directive 2001/82/EC
are fulfilled (e.g. availability of a qualified person within the Union (EEA), GMP inspection). For centrally authorised medicinal products the marketing authorisation holder will therefore need to specify an authorised importer established in the Union (EEA) and submit the corresponding variation (see Variation Guideline (2013/ C 223/01), classification B.II.b.2).  In addition, in accordance with Article 51
)(b) of Directive 2001/83/EC and Article 55(1)(b) of Directive 2001/82/EC the marketing authorisation holder will need to specify a site of batch control in the Union (EEA) where each production batch can undergo upon importation a full qualitative analysis, a quantitative analysis of at least all the active substances and all the other
tests or checks necessary to ensure the quality of medicinal products in accordance with the requirements of the marketing authorisation. For centrally authorised medicinal products the marketing authorisation holder will need to change the location of its current UK based site of batch control to a location established in the Union (EEA) and submit the corresponding variation (see Variation Guideline (2013/ C 223/01), classification B.II.b.2).   8. What if my batch release site is located in the UK?
In accordance with Article 51
) of Directive 2001/83/EC and Article 55
) of Directive 2001/82/EC, the qualified person of the manufacturing and importation authorisation holder is responsible to certify that each batch of medicinal product intended to be placed on the EEA market was manufactured in accordance with the Union GMP requirements and the marketing authorisation. The batch release site has to be located in the Union (EEA). For centrally authorised medicinal products the marketing authorisation holder will therefore need to transfer its current UK based site of batch release to a location established in the Union (EEA) and submit the corresponding variation (see Variation Guideline (2013/ C 223/01), classification B.II.b.2).  9. I am a UK based SME, would I still have access to financial and administrative assistance in accordance with Commission Regulation (EC) No
In order to be eligible for financial and administrative assistance, companies must be established in the Union (EEA
and meet the definition of an SME. As of the date of the withdrawal of the UK from the Union, the guidance for non-EEA based companies shall apply also to UK based companies:  to apply for SME status once the company has established a legal entity in the Union (EEA
For proof of establishment, the SME office requires a copy of the certificate of incorporation in the commercial register of the companies. In such cases, the SME declaration can be submitted in the name of the newly established subsidiary with details of the parent company to be declared.  to indirectly benefit from the SME incentives through an Union (EEA
established SME regulatory consultancy. SME regulatory consultancies may seek to benefit from the provisions of the SME Regulation on behalf of non-EEA based clients
only if both they and the client meet the SME criteria (i.e. fall below headcount and financial thresholds). In this case, both the regulatory consultancy and the non-EEA based company should submit SME declarations. If successful, the regulatory consultancy would receive an SME notification and the non-EEA based company would be listed in an annex to that notification as an SME client company. It is not possible for an SME regulatory consultancy to be considered eligible if they are acting on behalf of non-SME clients, as this would be contrary to the objectives of the SME Regulation. Further information is available on the EMA website (link) and in the SME User Guide (link

10. marketing authorisation or application based on a reference product authorised in the UK
A generic or hybrid application in accordance with Article 10 of Directive 2001/83/EC or Article 13 of Directive 2001/82/EC refers to information that is contained in the dossier of a reference medicinal product (RefMP) that is or has been authorised in the Union (EEA).
Generic/hybrid marketing authorisations granted before 30 March 2019 referring to a RefMP authorised by the UK (UK RefMP) remain valid
Generic/hybrid applications for which marketing authorisations will be granted after 29 March 2019 should refer to a RefMP that is or has been authorised in a EU-27 Member State or a contracting state of the EEA.
4
Applicants are advised to take this into account already at the time of submission of the application
11. Can medicinal products used in bioequivalence studies be sourced in the UK?  According to Article 10(1) of Directive 2001/83/EC or Article 13(1) of Directive 2001/82/EC the applicant can submit an abridged application if he can demonstrate that the medicinal product is a generic of a reference medicinal product which is or has been authorised in the Union or EEA for not less than eight years. According to Article 10(2)(b) of Directive 2001/83/EC and Article 13(2)(b) of Directive 2001/82/EC generic medicinal product means a medicinal product which has the same qualitative and quantitative composition in active substance and the same pharmaceutical form as the reference medicinal product, and whose bioequivalence with the reference medicinal product has been demonstrated by appropriate bioavailability studies.
(NEW) Pivotal studies (bioequivalence, in vitro dissolution tests or therapeutic equivalence studies, as appropriate) that have been conducted with a medicinal product sourced in the UK can be used in generic/hybrid marketing authorisation applications only if the marketing authorisation for that application will be granted before 30 March 2019.

2 See also the electronic application form for marketing authorisation applications, section 1.4.2.2 or 1.4.3.2
This will also facilitate management of generic/hybrid product's life cycle in the post-authorisation phase, considering for example the need to implement changes to the product information of the EEA RefMP also for the generic/hybrid products.
The (exceptional) situation where a RefMP is or has been authorised in the UK only is addressed in the EU's "Position paper on Goods placed on the Market under Union law before the withdrawal date" (footnote 7)
https://ec.europa.eu/commission/publications/position-paper-goods-placed-market-under-union-law-withdrawal-date_en

See also the electronic application form for marketing authorisation applications, section 1.4.2.3 or 1.4.3.3
In exceptional cases where bioequivalence studies are intended for use in new applications which will be submitted before 30 March 2019 and if these bioequivalence studies have been already completed the applicants may consider contacting the competent authority to discuss the particular circumstances of their application in order to avoid unnecessary repetition of studies in humans or animals. (NEW) In cases where bioequivalence studies have been conducted with a reference product sourced in the UK before 30 March 2019 and when this product is the same as an EU27 reference product, authorised either via the centralised procedure or mutual recognition or decentralised procedure based on the same dossier, the applicants may consider contacting the competent authority to discuss the particular circumstances of their application also in cases when the application cannot be submitted before 30 March 2019, in order to avoid unnecessary repetition of studies in humans or animals.

12. authorisation or biosimilar marketing authorisation application? (for medicines for human use)
The considerations described under question
10 and 11 regarding the choice of RefMP are also applicable to biosimilars.  The Guideline on similar biological medicinal products should however be consulted for the available scientific guidance when considering using a non-EEA authorised comparator (i.e. a non-EEA authorised version of the reference medicinal product) in the development of a biosimilar.  Batches of the RefMP released by the UK after 29 March 2019 will not be considered as a Union (EEA) authorised comparator. 13. Authorisation (GMA) concept?  The concept of 'global marketing authorisation within the meaning of Article 6(1) of Directive 2001/83/EC and Article 5(1) of Directive 2001/82/EC covers the initial marketing authorisation and all subsequent developments of the original medicinal product, irrespective of their authorisation procedures, namely variation or grant of a separate MA
to the same MAH
The GMA is accompanied only by a single regulatory data protection period
which applies both to data relating to the original medicinal product
and to data presented for any subsequent developments. That regulatory data protection period begins with the grant of the initial marketing authorisation in the Union (EEA)
Marketing authorisations granted before 30 March 2019 by the UK can still be considered as the initial marketing authorisation. 14. Union affect well-established use applications?  According to Article 10a of Directive 2001/83/EC and Article 13a of Directive 2001/82/EC it is possible to replace results of the pre-clinical and clinical trials by detailed references to published scientific literature if it can be demonstrated that the active substances of a medicinal product in the claimed therapeutic indication and (for veterinary products) target species have been in well-established use within the Union (EEA) for at least ten years, with recognised efficacy and an acceptable level of safety. In this regard, the provisions of Annex I of Directive 2001/83/EC or Annex I of Directive 2001/82/EC shall apply
Data sourced from the UK, while the UK was a Member State of the Union, can be taken into account to demonstrate that the active substances of a medicinal product in the claimed therapeutic indication and (for veterinary products) target species have been in well-established use within the Union (EEA) for at least ten years, with recognised efficacy and an acceptable level of safety.
7
-629/15P, para. 72.

629/15P, para. 65.
See also the electronic application form for marketing authorisation applications, section 1.4.2.1 or 1.4.3.1

15. Union affect traditional herbal medicinal products (traditional-use registration)?
for medicines for human use)
The traditional-use registration procedure allows the registration of herbal medicinal products without requiring particulars and documents on tests and trials on safety and efficacy, provided that there is sufficient evidence of the medicinal use of the product throughout a period of at least 30 years, including at least 15 years in the Union (EEA)
Data sourced from the UK, while the UK was a Member State of the Union, can be taken into account to demonstrate that the product has been in medicinal use throughout a period of at least 15 years within the Union (EEA)
16. How does Union affect the prevalence for orphan drug designation?
for medicines for human use)  For applications for orphan designation
or for its maintenance submitted after 29 March 2019, patients in the UK should no longer be taken into account in the calculation of the prevalence of the disease in order to meet the requirements for orphan drug designation as set out in Regulation (EC) No 141/2000 i.e. a condition affecting no more than 5 in 10 thousand persons in the Union (EEA)
located in the UK, if also nominated for Member States other than the UK?  The local representative mentioned in the product information should be located in the Union (EEA). Therefore, any local representative located in the UK and nominated for Member States other than the UK will have to be changed to a local representative located in the Union (EEA).  The corresponding amendments to labelling and package leaflet must be fully completed and implemented by the marketing authorisation holder before 30 March 2019, either as part of a regulatory procedure affecting the annexes (e.g. variation, renewal), or through a notification under an Article 61(3) of Directive 2001/83/EC or (for veterinary products) through a Type IAIN variation (see Variation Guideline (2013/ C 223/01), classification C.II.6.a). 17a. Union affect the local representative for UK mentioned in the product information?  After 29 March 2019, the mentioning of the local representative for UK in the product information will become obsolete.
he deletion of the local representative for UK in the product information will need to be incorporated as part of a future regulatory procedure affecting the annexes (e.g. variation, renewal) and the earliest opportunity after 29 March 2019 should be used
18.
affect
he sunset clause?  According to Article 24(4) to (6) of Directive 2001/83/EC, Article 28(4) to (6) of Directive 2001/82/EC and Articles 14(4) to (6) and 39(4) to (6) of Regulation (EC) No 726/2004 any authorisation which within three years of its granting is not followed by the actual placing on the market of the authorised product in the authorising Member State or on the Union market will cease to be valid. When an authorised product previously placed on the market in the authorising Member State or in the Union is no longer actually present on the market for a period of three consecutive years, the authorisation for that product will cease to be valid.  In case a centrally authorised medicinal product has only been marketed in the UK, the placing on the UK market, while UK was a Member State of the Union
will be taken into account to determine the applicability of the sunset clause for the medicinal product concerned. In this respect, if after the UK withdrawal from the Union
the medicinal product is not placed on any other market of the
remaining Member States, the three year period for the sunset clause will start running from the last date the medicinal product was placed on the UK market
while UK was a Member State of the Union.
19. What if my product is subject to Official Control Authority Batch Release (OCABR) and is currently tested by a UK Official Medicines Control Laboratory (OMCL)?
According to Article 114 of Directive 2001/83/EC and Article 82 of Directive 2001/82/EC, Member States may require the marketing authorisation holder of a human immunological medicinal product or a medicinal product derived from human blood or plasma or immunological veterinary medicinal product to submit samples from each batch of the bulk and/or the medicinal product for examination by an Official Medicines Control Laboratory (OMCL) or a laboratory that a Member State has designated for that purpose before the release on the market. This is referred to as Official Control Authority Batch Release (OCABR). According to the EU Administrative Procedure for Official Control Authority Batch Release10, prior to marketing in the Union (EEA), batches of medicinal products subject to independent testing should obtain an Official Control Authority Batch Release Certificate common to all Member States. This shall demonstrate that the batch of medicinal product has been examined and tested by an OMCL within the Union (EEA) in accordance with this procedure and with Official Control Authority Batch Release guidelines pertaining to the medicinal product and that it is in compliance with the approved specifications laid down in the relevant monographs of the European Pharmacopoeia (Ph. Eur.) and in the relevant marketing authorisation
For products placed on the market as of the withdrawal date,11 OCABR cannot be carried out by an OMCL located in the UK. OCABR will need to be carried out by an OMCL located within the Union (EEA) or by a country officially recognised by the Union for mutual recognition of batch release. The marketing authorisation holder will therefore need to identify a OMCL located in the Union (EEA) for official batch release or an officially recognised partner (as stated above) for official batch release. A list of the OMCLs that may be in a position to provide the Union OCABR certificates for different products is available to manufacturers from the European Directorate for the Quality of Medicines & Healthcare
EDQM
on request at batchrelease@edqm.eu
19a. Can I, as of the withdrawal date, import a medicinal product into the Union (EEA) on the basis of a certificate issued before the withdrawal date by the UK OMCL? (NEW) No. As of the withdrawal date, the mutual recognition of Official Control Authority Batch Release (OCABR) stops.  However, the Official Medicines Control Laboratory (OMCL) of an EU27 or EEA Member State may take account of the certificate issued by the UK OMCL when issuing a certificate.
10
Guideline for the administrative procedure to be followed by the competent OMCL authorities for the implementation of Directive 2001/83/EC Article 114 as amended by Directive 2004/27/EC, available at https://www.edqm.eu/en/batch-release-human-biologicals-vaccines-blood-and-plasma-derivatives
11
For goods placed on the EU market before the withdrawal date, the EU is trying to agree solutions with the United Kingdom in the withdrawal agreement. The essential principles of the EU's position on goods placed on the market under Union law before the withdrawal date are available here: https://ec.europa.eu/commission/publications/position-paper-goods-placed-market-under-union-law-withdrawal-date_en
The concept of placing on the market refers to each individual product, not to a type of product, irrespectively of whether it was manufactured as an individual unit or in series

19b. Does the change of the marketing authorisation holder due to the UK's withdrawal impact on the validity of the Official Control Authority Batch Release issued by a Official Medicines Control Laboratory (OMCL) of an EU27 or EEA Member State? (NEW) No. The Official Control Authority Batch Release (OCABR) of the OMCL of an EU27 or EEA Member State remains valid even if the marketing authorisation holder changes.  20. What if my product is subject to Official Batch Protocol Review (OBPR) and evaluation is done by a UK Competent Authority? (for veterinary medicines
According to Article 81 of Directive 2001/82/EC Member States may require the marketing authorisation holder for immunological veterinary medicinal products to submit to the competent authorities copies of all the control reports signed by the qualified person in accordance with Article 55 of Directive 2001/82/EC in order to verify that control tests were carried out in accordance with the methods laid down for the purposes of marketing authorisation. This is referred to as an 'Official Batch Protocol Review' (OBPR). OBPR may be carried out by a Competent Authority within the Union (EEA) or in a country officially recognised by the Union for mutual recognition of batch release (e.g. Switzerland)
For products placed on the market as of the withdrawal date,12 OBPR cannot be carried out by a UK Competent Authority. The marketing authorisation holder will therefore need to identify another Competent Authority located in the Union (EEA) or an officially recognised partner (as stated above) for official batch protocol review.
1hdrawal from the Union affect the status of inspection outcomes by the UK competent authority?  It is expected that findings of inspections, in particular to determine compliance with good manufacturing practice, good clinical practice and pharmacovigilance obligations, conducted by the UK competent authority before 30 March 2019 are implemented by the inspected entities in accordance with the applicable legislation, in particular Directive 2003/94/EC, Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 1252/2014 and Directive 91/412/EEC with regard to good manufacturing practice, Directive 2001/20/EC and Commission Directive 2005/28/EC with regard to good clinical practice and Regulation (EC) No 726/2004
Directive 2001/83/EC and Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) No 520/2012 with regard to pharmacovigilance obligations
22devices by UK notified bodies?  This issue is addressed in the Commission Notice on the withdrawal of the United Kingdom and EU rules in the field of industrial products that also covers medical devices.
12
For goods placed on the EU market before the withdrawal date, the EU is trying to agree solutions with the United Kingdom in the withdrawal agreement. The essential principles of the EU's position on goods placed on the market under Union law before the withdrawal date are available here: https://ec.europa.eu/commission/publications/position-paper-goods-placed-market-under-union-law-withdrawal-date_en
The concept of placing on the market refers to each individual product, not to a type of product, irrespectively of whether it was manufactured as an individual unit or in series


opinion for ancillary medicinal substances in medical devices requested by UK notified bodies?
According to Article 1(4) of Directive 93/42/EEC where a device incorporates, as an integral part, a substance which, if used separately, may be considered to be a medicinal product within the meaning of Article 1 of Directive 2001/83/EC and which is liable to act upon the body with action ancillary to that of the device, that device shall be assessed and authorized in accordance with Directive 93/42/EEC
In accordance with Annex I of Directive 93/42/EEC for a new medical device, the notified body acts as the applicant in an initial consultation procedure with EMA concerning the scientific opinion on the ancillary medicinal substances incorporated in the medical devices.  Union product legislation requires Notified Bodies to be established in a Member State and be designated by a Member State notifying authority. From the withdrawal date, UK notified bodies will lose their status as the Union notified bodies. They will no longer be able to be an applicant in an initial consultation procedure with EMA and EMA will not be able to issue a scientific opinion to them as notified bodies of a third country. 24. market a multi-country pack which includes the UK
Multi-country packs are medicinal products that are labelled to allow their placing on the market in several Member States with the same packaging. This possibility is subject to the requirements set out in Directive 2001/83/EC in Title V or Directive 2001/82/EC in Title V and requires that the summary of product characteristics is the same in all the markets concerned.  (NEW) Article
57 and 62 of Directive 2001/83/EC and Article
58 and 63 of Directive 2001/82/EC allow Member States to require inclusion of certain additional labelling information in
restricted area (the so-called "blue box") provided that all the strict conditions for the application of Article 57 or Article 62 of Directive 2001/83/EC and Article 58 or Article 63 of Directive 2001/82/EC are fulfilled.  In applying these provisions, multi-country packs with the UK market are only possible if
the product information is exactly the same in the United Kingdom as in the EU27 (EEA); and
the Member State has allowed additional information labelled in the "blue box". This additional information must be limited to certain administrative information.
n any event the product labelling and package leaflet must be fully in line with the summary of product characteristics as authorised in the Union (EEA)
-up arrangements are in the UK?  According to Article 2 of Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) No 520/2012 back-up arrangements shall apply in the absence of the QPPV. As the tasks of QPPV need to be carried in a Member State of the Union (EEA), the back-up arrangements for cases of absence of the QPPV, which replace such tasks, also need to be performed in the Union (EEA). Where a MAH relies on the services of a deputy QPPV as part of its back-up arrangements in the absence of the QPPV, those arrangements should ensure that the deputy QPPV is established and performs his/her tasks in the Union (EEA). For veterinary medicines, reference is made to the EMA Brexit practical guidance.

26. Who will take over supervision of the manufacturing sites of medicinal products in third countries (including UK after the Withdrawal date) previously supervised by UK authorities and when will the next GMP inspection be conducted? (NEW) According to Articles 18 and 43 of Regulation (EC) No 726/2004, in case of medicinal products imported from third countries the supervisory authorities shall be the competent authorities of the Member State or Member States that granted the authorisation provided for in Article 40(3) of Directive 2001/83/EC or Article 44(3) of Directive 2001/82/EC respectively to the importer of the concerned medicinal product.
As of the withdrawal date, UK authorities will no longer undertake the role of a supervisory authority. The new Union supervisory authority responsible for supervision of manufacturing sites located in UK and third country sites previously inspected by UK will decide, using a risk-based approach, when an inspection of the site(s) concerned will be required, in order to confirm or re-confirm GMP compliance.  27. Can I continue to use after 29 March 2019 a manufacturing site for which the Union GMP certificate has been issued by UK authorities?(NEW) All medicinal products for human and veterinary use manufactured or imported into the Union (EEA), including medicinal products intended for export, are to be manufactured in accordance with the principles and guidelines of good manufacturing practice.13 14 A certificate of good manufacturing practice inspection shows that the manufacturer complies with the principles and guidelines of good manufacturing practice as provided for by the Union legislation.15 16
While the Union legislation does not require a Union GMP certificate issued by a Member State for issuing a marketing authorisation17 or importation of a medicinal product,18 in practice GMP certificates issued by the Union competent authorities are used to confirm the Union GMP compliance in regulatory submissions (e.g. marketing authorisation applications) and for imports from third countries. This means that GMP compliance of manufacturing sites in third countries may also be confirmed through other means, based on a risk
ased approach (e.g. based on information on GMP compliance from third country regulatory authorities). GMP certificates issued by the UK competent authority before 30 March 201
should therefore be considered as such information on GMP compliance from the third country regulatory authority. 28. Shall the information about the unique identifier uploaded to the UK repository between 9 February 2019 and 29 March 2019 be transferred to another repository in the Union? (for medicines for human use)(NEW) Article 33(1) of Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2016/161 requires marketing authorisation holders to ensure that unique identifiers and related information are uploaded to the Union repository system before a product is released for sale or distribution. Any information uploaded to the Union hub or a national repository should be transferred and stored in all national or
13 Commission Directive 2003/94/EC, Recital (1). 14 Commission Directive 91/412/EEC. 15 Directive 2001/83/EC, Article 111(5). 16 Directive 2001/82/EC, Article 80(5). 17 Article 8(3)(ha) of Directive 2001/83/EC
18 Article 51(1)(b) of Directive 2001/83/EC, Article 55(1)(b) of Directive 2001/82/EC

supranational repositories serving the territory of Member State(s) where the product is intended to be placed on market. Therefore, the information on products released on the market before the withdrawal date will be already present in the national repositories where the product is intended to be placed on the market and there is no need to transfer information from the UK repository
29. Can activities related to safety features take place in the UK? (for medicines for human use)(NEW) The manufacturer placing the safety features, as referred to in Articles 14 and 15 of the Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2016/161, is the manufacturer actually affixing the unique identifier and anti-tampering device on the packaging. There is no requirement that such a manufacturer has to be located in the Union (EEA). However, if a manufacturer is not in the Union (EEA), then the obligation to ensure that Articles 14 and 15 of the Delegated Regulation (EU) 2016/161 are complied with lies with the importer. The Qualified Person at the batch release site in the Union (EEA) will have to ensure that the safety features have been affixed to the packaging (Article 51(1) of Directive 2001/83/EC). This task may be delegated to appropriately trained personnel or third parties, as set out in Annex 16 to the EU GMP guidelines (section 1.7). For general GMP requirements on outsourced activities, refer to Chapter 7 of the EU GMP guidelines
The responsibility for ensuring that the information is uploaded in the repositories system lies with the MAH (or the person responsible for placing on the market medicinal products which are parallel distributed/parallel imported). Delegated Regulation (EU) 2016/161 does not prohibit MAHs from subcontracting or delegating data-upload tasks to on-boarding partners (OBPs) acting on their behalf. However, the infrastructures, hardware and software used for data upload must be physically located in the EEA (see question 7.19 in Questions and Answers on Safety Features for Medicinal Products for Human Use). 30. Can parallel trade of medicinal products sourced in the UK and supplied to the EU(27) or EEA continue as of the withdrawal date?(NEW) Parallel trade of medicinal products in the internal market is possible in particular because of (i) the rules in the internal market for the exhaustion of trade mark rights; and (ii) the fact that the summary of product characteristics and the labelling of medicinal products are  apart from issues of language used  identical. As of the withdrawal date, the rules for exhaustion of trade mark rights in the Union (EEA) no longer apply in respect of products placed on the UK market. Moreover, the terms of the marketing authorisation will over time differ.19 Hence, parallel trade of medicines sourced in the UK is in practice no longer possible as of the withdrawal date. However, from the point of view of Union pharmaceutical law, medicines that have been sourced in the UK, and brought into the territory of the EU27 (EEA) before the withdrawal date can continue to circulate on the EU27 (EEA) market if they are authorise

19
To this may add national rules on parallel trade of medicinal products with third countries.

31. Does, as of the withdrawal date, Article 76(4) of Directive 2001/83/EC and Article 57(1)(o) of Regulation (EC) No 726/2004 continue to apply to parallel trade of medicinal products sourced in the UK?(NEW) Article 76(4) of Directive 2001/83/EC and Article 57(1)(o) of Regulation (EC) No 726/2004 address the distribution of a centrally authorised medicinal product from one Member State to another by a pharmaceutical company independent of the marketing-; in the context of this legislation, this notion nationally authorised products).  It does not cover export or import of the product from third countries. Moreover, as of the withdrawal date, central marketing authorisations cease to be valid in the UK. As of the withdrawal date, Article 76(4) of Directive 2001/83/EC and Article 57(1)(o) of Regulation (EC) No 726/2004 no longer appl
to medicinal products sourced in the UK for the purpose of parallel distribution in EU27 (EEA)
However, it is recalled that, as set out in the previous Q&A pair, parallel trade of medicinal products sourced in the United Kingdom will anyhow no longer be possible as of the withdrawal date. 32. Will parallel distribution notices under Article 76(4) of Directive 2001/83/EC and Article 57(1)(o) of Regulation (EC) No 726/2004 with UK as the Member State of destination remain valid as of the withdrawal date?(NEW) Article 76(4) of Directive 2001/83/EC and Article 57(1)(o) of Regulation (EC) No 726/2004 address the sourcing of centrally authorised medicinal products in Member States and their distribution in other Member States (to be distinguished from parallel imports of nationally authorised products). It does not cover export or import of the product from third countries. Moreover, as of the withdrawal date, central marketing authorisations cease to be valid in the UK. Therefore, as of the withdrawal date, notices with the UK as the only destination country will become obsolete, whereas, notices with several destination countries will remain valid with respect to EU27 destination countries. 33. Will parallel distribution notices under Article 76(4) of Directive 2001/83/EC and Article 57(1)(o) of Regulation (EC) No 726/2004 for a parallel distributor located in UK remain valid as of the withdrawal date?(NEW) Article 76(4) of Directive 2001/83/EC and Article 57(1)(o) of Regulation (EC) No 726/2004 address the sourcing of centrally authorised medicinal products in Member States and their distribution in other Member States (to be distinguished from parallel imports of nationally authorised products). It does not cover export or import of the product from third countries. Moreover, as of the withdrawal date, central marketing authorisations cease to be valid in the UK. Therefore, as of the withdrawal date, notices to distributors in the UK will become obsolete
Please note that the transfer of parallel distribution notices to another entity is not foreseen and a change of address is possible only in case the legal entity remains the same. 34. Will parallel distribution notices under Article 76(4) of Directive 2001/83/EC and Article 57(1)(o) of Regulation (EC) No 726/2004 with a re-packaging site located in UK remain valid as of the withdrawal date?(NEW) Article 76(4) of Directive 2001/83/EC and Article 57(1)(o) of Regulation (EC) No 726/2004 address the sourcing of centrally authorised medicinal products in Member States and their distribution in other Member States (to be distinguished from parallel imports of nationally authorised products).  It does not cover export or import of the product from third countries. Therefore as of the withdrawal date the UK sites will have to have been removed, in order for these notices to remain valid as of the withdrawal date

35. What will change regarding reporting requirements into EudraVigilance of Individual Case Safety Reports (ICSRs) from the UK? (for medicines for human use) (NEW) According to Article 107 of Directive 2001/83/EC suspected serious adverse reactions have to be reported no matter if they occurred in the Union (EEA) or in third countries.
uspected non-serious adverse reactions occurring in third countries do not have to be reported in the Union (EEA). Thus, as of the withdrawal date
non-serious adverse reactions that have occurred in the UK before the withdrawal date have to be reported;
it is no longer mandatory to submit to EudraVigilance reports of suspected non-serious adverse reactions that have occurred in the UK as of the withdrawal date
For individual cases originating from UK and submitted to EudraVigilance before the withdrawal date, when a follow-up information is received by the marketing authorisation holder as of the withdrawal date, it should be continued to be submitted to EudraVigilance when third country reporting criteria apply. As of the withdrawal date, UK authorities will no longer have access to EudraVigilance. Marketing authorisation holders are therefore reminded that they will need to submit into EudraViglance information that they might receive from UK authorities regarding cases occurring in the UK, in line with the reporting requirements for non-EU/EEA cases.  Referral procedures ongoing on the withdrawal date will continue, irrespective of the Member State that triggered the referral, with the exception of MRP/DCP referral procedures on applications with UK as the reference member state20.  As of the withdrawal date, UK products will formally no longer be part of Union referral procedures. As a consequence, as of the withdrawal date assessment reports will no longer be shared with marketing authorisation holders/applicants for UK products that were previously concerned by the referral procedure. Nevertheless, all data submitted in the referral procedure, including data submitted on UK products before the withdrawal date, will be taken into account during the assessment. A scientific opinion issued as of the withdrawal date, as well as Commission Decisions adopted as of the withdrawal date, will not include UK products. The Commission Decision will only be addressed to the EU27 (EEA) Member States.
20 As stated in question 1b of the Questions and Answers published by the Coordination Group for Mutual Recognition and Decentralised Procedures
Human and  Questions and Answers published by the Coordination Group for Mutual Recognition and Decentralised Procedures  Veterinary http://www.hma.eu/fileadmin/dateien/Veterinary_medicines/CMDv_Website/Brexit/QAs_UK_withdrawal_from_EU_national_authorised_medicinal_products.pdf, with regards to MRP/DCP procedures with UK as the before 30 March 2019 (i.e. agreement of the concerned Member States [..] or decision of the Commission [..]) the procedure is stopped and the applicant needs to submit a new application to a new Reference Member not continue after 29 March 2019.

The fees for referrals are determined at the start date of procedure. For medicinal products for human use the fees for Pharmacovigilance referrals are calculated based on products authorised in the Union (EEA) (as recorded in 'Article 57 database') at that time. Until the withdrawal date this includes UK nationally approved products. 37. How do I handle, as of the withdrawal date, data from UK in the Periodic Safety Update Reports? (NEW) Periodic safety update reports (PSURs) should present cumulative and interval summaries of global safety data obtained from various sources worldwide. Relevant safety data obtained from UK sources as of the withdrawal date should therefore continue to be included in PSURs as per usual requirements for third country data. For the calculation of exposure from marketing experience by region, patients exposed in the UK until the withdrawal date should be included in the EU/EEA estimate. Thereafter, UK patient exposure should be considered as part of the non-EU/EEA regions.
European Commission Directorate-General for Health and Food Safety European Medicines Agency
Commission européenne/Europese Commissie, 1049 Bruxelles/Brussel, BELGIQUE/BELGIË
Tel. +32 22991111 Office: F 101 4/066
EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL HEALTH AND FOOD SAFETY
Brussels, 23 January 2018
OTICE TO STAKEHOLDERS
ITHDRAWAL OF THE
NITED KINGDOM AND EU RULES ON PLANT PROTECTION PRODUCTS
The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. This means that unless a ratified withdrawal agreement
establishes another date, all Union primary and secondary law will cease to apply to the United Kingdom from 30 March 2019, 00:00h (CET) ('the withdrawal date').
The United Kingdom will then become a 'third country'.
Preparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for European and national authorities, but also for private parties.  In view of the considerable uncertainties, in particular concerning the content of a possible withdrawal agreement, business operators involved in the activities falling under the scope of Regulation (EC) No 1107/2009 concerning the placing of plant protection products on the market and Regulation (EC) No 396/2005 on maximum residue levels of pesticides (MRLs), including applicants for an active substance or plant protection product
are reminded of certain legal repercussions stemming from currently applicable rules of Union law
which need to be considered when the United Kingdom becomes a third country. Subject to any transitional arrangement that may be contained in a possible withdrawal agreement, as of the withdrawal date, the EU rules in the field of plant protection products and pesticides no longer apply to the United Kingdom
In particular, business operators should consider that, according to Union law, third countries cannot act as rapporteur Member States, zonal rapporteur Member State
or evaluating Member State
for MRLs

Negotiations are ongoing with the United Kingdom with a view to reaching a withdrawal agreement.
Furthermore, in accordance with Article 50(3) of the Treaty on European Union, the European Council, in agreement with the United Kingdom, may unanimously decide that the Treaties cease to apply at a later date.
A third country is a country not member of the EU
4
With the exception of contracting states of the European Economic Area ("EEA").
2 Concerning submissions of new applications
business operators should take into account the expected timelines of different regulatory procedures in which the United Kingdom would be acting as
for example
rapporteur Member State, zonal rapporteur Member State or evaluating Member State for MRLs. Taking account of the aforementioned uncertainties as well as the regulatory framework, business operators should consider taking the relevant actions. For example, where there is a risk that those procedures are not concluded by the date when the United Kingdom will leave the Union, applicants may choose by preference another Member State to carry out the evaluation or assessment. Concerning those on-going procedures for which the United Kingdom is currently carrying out an assessment or evaluation, business operators should carefully monitor their progress.  Where there are clear indications that the procedure will not be concluded by the withdrawal date, taking account of the uncertainties as well as the regulatory framework, business operators should consider taking the necessary actions. For example, a change of rapporteur or evaluating Member State may be required.  The Commission services is working with Members States and EEA countries to establish a coordinated way forward for the timely communication, agreement and technical transfer of the file in case change is needed. This will be particularly relevant for the review programme of existing active substances, for which the United Kingdom was assigned by law (Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 686/2012) as rapporteur and co-rapporteur Member State. The website of the Commission on approval of active substances (http://ec.europa.eu/food/plant/pesticides/approval_active_substances_en)  provide
general information concerning the approval of active substances as well as a series of Questions & Answers (Q&A) in relation to Regulation (EC) No 1107/2009 and Regulation (EC) No 396/2005. These page
will be updated with further information and relevant Q&A pairs, where necessary. European Commission
Directorate-General Health and Food Safety
EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL FOR HEALTH AND FOOD SAFETY
Brussels, 18 February 2019 REV
Replaces the Q&A document (REV1) published on 2 October 2018
UESTIONS AND ANSWERS RELATED TO THE UNITED KINGDOM
WITHDRAWAL FROM THE EUROPEAN UNION WITH REGARD TO PLANT PROTECTION PRODUCTS AND PESTICIDES RESIDUES On 23 January 2018, the European Commission services published a "Notice to stakeholders  withdrawal of the United Kingdom and EU rules on plant protection products".
This list of Questions and Answers (Q&A pairs) which has been drafted by the European Commission services, aims at giving further guidance on the basis of the above-mentioned notice to stakeholders. The list of Q&A pairs will be further updated and complemented when necessary. The new text introduced in this version of Q&As "Rev2" is indicated by the word "NEW". This list of Q&As addresses a situation where the United Kingdom becomes a third country on 30 March 2019 ("the withdrawal date") without a withdrawal agreement and hence without a transition period provided for in the Withdrawal Agreement
GENERAL 1. What if my company is established in the United Kingdom and it is the holder of a PPP authorisation in a Member State? Regulation (EC) No 1107/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 21 October 2009 concerning the placing of plant protection products on the market
("the PPP Regulation") does not require applicants for authorisations for plant protection products ("PPP") and authorisation holders to be established in the European Union. Therefore, no action needs to be taken in this respect.   2. What if my company is an applicant for approval of a substance, or for the setting/modification/deletion/review of a MRL and it is established in the United Kingdom

This notice replaced the notice of 26 September 2017.
Cf. Part four of the Agreement on the withdrawal of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland from the European Union and the European Atomic Energy Community
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=uriserv:OJ.CI.2019.066.01.0001.01.ENG&toc=OJ:C:2019:066I:TOC).
3
OJ L 309, 24.11.2009, p. 1
2 The PPP Regulation and Regulation (EC) No 396/2005 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 February 2005 on maximum residue levels of pesticides in or on food and feed of plant and animal origin and amending Council Directive 91/414/EEC
("the MRL Regulation
do not require applicants for approval of active substances and applicants for MRLs to be established in the European Union. Therefore, no action needs to be taken in this respect.   3. What if the manufacturing site of my active substance is located in the United Kingdom
The PPP Regulation and MRL Regulation do not set any specific requirement regarding the location of the manufacturing site(s) of active substances, which can be manufactured in third countries. Therefore, no action needs to be taken in this respect. However, after the withdrawal date the substance will be imported from a third country and will be subject to any applicable EU law in this respect (e.g. administrative formalities linked to the introduction into the customs territory of the EU).   4. What if the manufacturing site of my PPP is located in the United Kingdom
The PPP Regulation and MRL Regulation does not set any specific requirement regarding the location of the manufacturing site(s) of PPP, which can be manufactured in third countries. Therefore, no action needs to be taken in this respect by authorisation holders. However, after the withdrawal date PPP will be imported from a third country and will be subject to any applicable EU law in this respect (e.g. administrative formalities linked to the introduction into the customs territory of the EU).
EW APPLICATIONS  5. What if my company is considering submitting a new application for an active substance for which the United Kingdom could be the rapporteur Member State (RMS)? What if my company wishes to apply for an amendment to the approval of an active substance under Article 7 of the PPP Regulation for which the United Kingdom has been the RMS? Until the withdrawal date, the United Kingdom remains a member of the European Union, with all the rights and obligations that derive from its membership, including the principle of sincere cooperation which states that the Union and all its Member States shall assist each other in carrying out the Treaty. Thus, the United Kingdom can still be chosen as RMS. However, as of the withdrawal date, the United Kingdom can no longer act as a RMS. This also applies if the
ithdrawal Agreement is concluded: during the transition period, the United Kingdom cannot act as RMS.
Applicants should take this into account when choosing the RMS: Choosing the United Kingdom means that the file would need to be handed over to another Member State taking up the role as RMS before the withdrawal date

OJ L 70, 16.3.2005, p.1.
See Article 128
) of the Withdrawal Agreement
3 6. What if my company is considering submitting a new application for a PPP or for MRLs for which the United Kingdom could be the zonal rapporteur Member State (zRMS) or the Evaluating Member State (EMS)
Until the withdrawal date, the United Kingdom remains a member of the European Union, with all the rights and obligations that derive from its membership, including the principle of sincere cooperation which states that the Union and all its Member States shall assist each other in carrying out the Treaty. Thus, the United Kingdom can still be chosen as zRMS or as Evaluating Member State for MRLs. However, as of the withdrawal date, the United Kingdom can no longer act as a zRMS or as EMS. This also applies if the
ithdrawal Agreement is concluded: during the transition period, the United Kingdom cannot act as zRMS or Evaluating Member State for MRLs.
Applicants should take this into account.  In the context of an application for authorisation or renewal of authorisation of a PPP, the evaluation by the zRMS is considered completed, when the assessment pursuant to Article 36(1) or Article 43 of the PPP Regulation is made available to the concerned Member States within the same zone
In the context of an application for MRLs, the evaluation by the EMS is considered completed, when the evaluation report is made available to the Commission pursuant to Article 9(1) of the MRL Regulation
APPLICATIONS FOR RENEWAL OF THE APPROVAL OF AN ACTIVE SUBSTANCE 7. What if the United Kingdom was designated as RMS or Co-RMS under Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) No 686/2012 and my company needs to submit an application for renewal of the approval of an active substance?  Until the withdrawal date, the United Kingdom remains a member of the European Union, with all the rights and obligations that derive from membership, including the principle of sincere cooperation which states that the Union and all its Member States shall assist each other in carrying out the Treaty. Thus, the United Kingdom can still act as RMS or Co-RMS under the renewal procedure. However, as of the withdrawal date, the United Kingdom can no longer act as a RMS or Co-RMS. This also applies if the
ithdrawal Agreement is concluded: during the transition period, the United Kingdom cannot act as RMS or Co-RMS.
An amendment to Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) No 686/2012 has been adopted by the Commission to this effect

See Article 128
) of the Withdrawal Agreement
7
See Article 128(6) of the Withdrawal Agreement
8
Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2018/155 of 31 January 2018 amending Implementing Regulation (EU) No 686/2012 allocating to Member States, for the purposes of the renewal procedure, the evaluation of active substances, OJ L 29, 1.2.2018, p. 8
4
N-GOING ASSESSMENTS 8. What if the United Kingdom is RMS for the assessment of the application for approval of my substance or application for an amendment to the approval, or for the assessment of confirmatory information (Article 13(3) of the PPP Regulation), and my dossier is already submitted to the United Kingdom? What will happen with the on-going evaluation of my application for approval?  As of the withdrawal date, the United Kingdom can no longer act as a RMS. This also applies if the
ithdrawal Agreement is concluded: during the transition period, the United Kingdom cannot act as RMS.
While the Withdrawal Agreement provides for the transfer of files and documents relating to ongoing procedures,10 stakeholders are strongly advised to carefully monitor progress of on-going assessments. The Commission services are currently working with Member States and EEA countries in order to establish a coordinated way forward for a timely communication and technical transfer of the files concerned. 9. What if the United Kingdom was designated as RMS under Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) No 686/201211 and my supplementary dossier is already submitted to the United Kingdom? What will happen with the ongoing evaluation of my application for the renewal of approval?
s of the withdrawal date, the United Kingdom can no longer act as a RMS. This also applies if the
ithdrawal Agreement is concluded: during the transition period, the United Kingdom cannot act as RMS.12 The Withdrawal Agreement provides for the transfer of files and documents relating to ongoing procedures. (NEW) The Commission has adopted an amendment to Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) No 686/2012 to allocate the role of RMS to an EU-27 Member State.13 Commission services continue to assess whether additional re-allocations are necessary.
10. Is the new RMS entitled to require fees or charges and if so, to what extent
(NEW) The new RMS who has agreed to take over files from the UK is entitled, in accordance with Article 7
of the PPP Regulation and Article 42 of the MRL Regulation to recover costs of work carried out under these Regulations. The conditions set out in Article 74 of the PPP Regulation and Article 42 of the MRL Regulation apply.
See Article 128
) of the Withdrawal Agreement
10
See Article
of the Withdrawal Agreement
11
Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) No 686/2012 of 26 July 2012 allocating to Member States, for the purposes of the renewal procedure, the evaluation of active substances
OJ L 200, 27.7.2012, p. 5
12
See Article 128
) of the Withdrawal Agreement
13
Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2019/150 of 30 January 2019 amending Implementing Regulation (EU) No 686/2012 as regards the rapporteur Member State for the evaluation of the following active substances contained in plant protection products: deltamethrin, diflufenican, epoxiconazole, fluoxastrobin, prothioconazole and tebuconazole, OJ L 27, 31.1.2019, p. 23
5 11.
hat if the United Kingdom is zRMS for the assessment of the application of an authorisation or the renewal of an authorisation for a PPP, or EMS for an application for a MRL? What will happen with the ongoing evaluation of my application for PPP authorisation or the MRL?   As of the withdrawal date, the United Kingdom can no longer act as a zRMS or EMS. This also applies if the
ithdrawal Agreement is concluded: during the transition period, the United Kingdom cannot act as zRMS or EMS.14 Concerning procedures that are ongoing on the withdrawal date and for which the United Kingdom is acting as zRMS for the assessment of the application of an authorisation or the renewal of an authorisation for a PPP, or EMS for an application for a MRL
the zRMS or EMS will need to be changed.  For evaluations of PPP applications ongoing on the withdrawal date, the Withdrawal Agreement provides for the transfer of files and documents relating to ongoing procedures.15 The Commission Services work with Members States and the Zonal Steering Committees in order to establish a coordinated way forward for a timely communication and technical transfer of the file. Please see also Question 11 for more details regarding the granting of authorisations by other Member States for plant protection product assessed by the United Kingdom as zRMS.
or ongoing MRL applications, the new EMS will carry on with the evaluation in accordance with Article 8 of the MRL Regulation or, where that evaluation is considered completed by the United Kingdom before the withdrawal date (see Question 6), perform the assessment of supplementary information potentially requested by the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) in accordance with Article 11(2) of the MRL Regulation.
ONCLUDED ASSESSMENTS 12.
hat if an EU Member State wants to make a decision on an authorisation for a PPP based on an assessment concluded by the United Kingdom before the withdrawal date?
ntil the withdrawal date the United Kingdom may act as zRMS, whereas the other Member States act as Member States concerned (cMS).16 The zonal assessment process is a collaborative process involving also scrutiny of the application by all the cMS and established in a harmonised format (Article 36(1) of the PPP Regulation). When the assessment by the United Kingdom is completed, i.e. made available to the other Member States in accordance with Article 36(1) of the PPP Regulation and the United Kingdom has issued its national authorisation before the withdrawal date, other Member States will have to decide, within 120 days, on                                                  14
See Article 128
) of the Withdrawal Agreement
15
See Article 4
of the Withdrawal Agreement
16
This system applies for the first authorisation of a plant protection product in one zone or, through the reference of Article 43(3) of the PPP Regulation, also for applications for renewals
6 the application in accordance with Article 37(4) and 36(2) of the PPP Regulation on the basis of the assessment carried out and completed by the United Kingdom.  However, whe
the assessment by the United Kingdom is completed, i.e. made available to the other Member States in accordance with Article 36(1) of the PPP Regulation, but the United Kingdom has not issued its national authorisation prior to the withdrawal date, there is no authorisation granted prior to the withdrawal date, which (in addition to the assessment) is needed to trigger the 120-days deadline for the authorisation decision by a cMS (Article 37(4) of the PPP Regulation). Therefore, the authorisation that would have been issued by the original zRMS has to be substituted in that case by one of the cMS. This cMS will issue such authorisation on the basis of the assessment concluded by the United Kingdom
Business operators finding themselves in this situation will have to approach one or more of the cMS with the relevant request  cMS could then agree appropriate arrangements in the respective Zonal Steering Committee.
UTUAL RECOGNITION OF AUTHORISATIONS 13.
hat if my company wishes to obtain after the United Kingdom withdrawal an authorisation in an EU Member State of the same zone or another zone by mutual recognition in accordance with Article 40 of the PPP Regulation on the basis of an authorisation that was granted by the United Kingdom?   As of the withdrawal date, an EU-27 Member State of the same zone or another zone (in accordance with Article 40(1)(b) and (c) of the PPP Regulation) can no longer recognise an authorisation which was issued by the United Kingdom
This also applies if the
ithdrawal Agreement is concluded: during the transition period, the United Kingdom cannot be a reference Member State in the mutual recognition procedure.17 Business operators will need to (re-)apply for an authorisation based on an existing product authorisation in another EU-27 Member State. However, where an authorisation by an EU-27 Member State has been granted under the mutual recognition procedure before the withdrawal date, this authorisation is not affected by the withdrawal of the United Kingdom.
ARALLEL TRADE PERMIT
14. Are parallel trade permit
(Article 52 of the PPP Regulation
granted by an EU-27 Member State valid as of the withdrawal date for plant protection products of which the United Kingdom was the Member State of origin? (NEW) Article 52 of the PPP Regulation provides for issuance of parallel trade permit
for parallel trade between Member States. As of the withdrawal date, a parallel trade permit issued by an EU-27 Member State prior to the withdrawal date for a plant protection product of which the United Kingdom was the Member State of origin is no longer valid18
Plant protection products benefiting from such parallel trade permit can therefore no longer be placed on the market in the particular                                                  17
See Article 128
) of the Withdrawal Agreement
18
A condition for granting a parallel trade permit under Article 52 is that it is granted to a product that is identical to a plant protection product authorised in a
EU Member State (Member State of Origin).
7 Member State. This does not affect the possibility to use, in the EU-27 products purchased prior to the withdrawal date
EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL HEALTH AND FOOD SAFETY
Brussels, 23 January 2018
OTICE TO STAKEHOLDERS
ITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND EU RULES ON BIOCIDAL PRODUCTS
The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. This means that unless the withdrawal agreement
establishes another date, all Union primary and secondary law ceases to apply to the United Kingdom from 30 March 2019, 00:00h (CET) ("the withdrawal date"). The United Kingdom will then become a 'third country'. Preparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for European and national authorities, but also for private parties. In view of the considerable uncertainties, in particular concerning the content of a possible withdrawal agreement, business operators involved in the activities falling under the scope of Regulation (EC) No 528/2012 concerning the making available on the market and use of biocidal products are reminded of certain legal repercussions stemming from currently applicable rules of Union law which need to be considered when  the United Kingdom becomes a third country. Subject to any transitional arrangement that may be contained in a possible withdrawal agreement, as of the withdrawal date, the EU rules in the field of biocidal products no longer apply to the United Kingdom. In particular, b
iness operators should consider that, according to Union law, third countries cannot act as evaluating Member States or reference Member States2.  Concerning submissions of any new applications
business operators should take into account the expected timelines of the different regulatory procedures in which the United Kingdom would be acting as
for example, evaluating Member State or reference Member State
Taking account of these uncertainties as well as the regulatory framework, business operators should consider taking the relevant actions. For example, where there is a risk that those procedures are not concluded by the date that the United Kingdom leave
the Union, applicants may choose by preference another evaluating Member State or reference Member State to carry out the evaluation. Concerning those
-going procedures for which the United Kingdom is currently carrying out an evaluation, business operators should carefully monitor their progress.  Where there are clear indications that the procedure will not be concluded by the withdrawal date, taking account of the uncertainties as well as the regulatory framework, business operators should
Negotiations are ongoing with the United Kingdom with a view to reaching a withdrawal agreement.
2 With the exception of contracting States of the European Economic Area ("EEA countries") and Switzerland. consider taking the relevant actions. For example, business operators may consider changing to another evaluating Member State.  Business operators should also consider that, according to Union law

holders of product authorisation
must be established within the Union
or EEA countries or Switzerland);
-
active substance or product suppliers included in the list referred to in Article 95 of the Biocidal Products Regulation (EU) No 528/2012 must be established or have a representative established within the Union
or EEA countries or Switzerland
The Commission services and the European Chemicals Agency (ECHA) are working with Members States
EEA countries and Switzerland to establish a coordinated way forward for the timely communication, agreement and technical transfer of the file in case change is needed. This will be particularly relevant for the review programme of existing active substances for which the United Kingdom was assigned as evaluating Member State by law (Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 1062/2014
The website of the Commission on approval of active substances (https://ec.europa.eu/health/biocides/policy_en) provides general information concerning the approval of active substances as well as a series of Questions & Answers (Q&A) in relation to Biocidal Products Regulation (EU) No 528/2012 . This information is also available on the ECHA website. These pages will be updated with further information and relevant Q&A, where necessary
European Commission
Directorate-General Health and Food Safety
EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL FOR HEALTH AND FOOD SAFETY
Brussels, 23 October 2018 REV1  Replaces the Q&A document published on 13 September 2017
UESTIONS AND ANSWERS RELATED TO THE UNITED KINGDOM'S WITHDRAWAL FROM THE EUROPEAN UNION WITH REGARD TO THE BIOCIDES SECTOR On 23 January 2018, the European Commission services published a "Notice to stakeholders  withdrawal of the United Kingdom and EU rules on biocidal products".
This notice recalled the following:
The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. This means that unless the withdrawal agreement
establishes another date, all Union primary and secondary law ceases to apply to the United Kingdom from 30 March 2019, 00:00h (CET) ("the withdrawal date"). The United Kingdom will then become a 'third country'. Preparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for European and national authorities, but also for private parties. In view of the considerable uncertainties, in particular concerning the content of a possible withdrawal agreement, business operators involved in the activities falling under the scope of Regulation (EC) No 528/2012 concerning the making available on the market and use of biocidal products are reminded of certain legal repercussions stemming from currently applicable rules of Union law which need to be considered when the United Kingdom becomes a third country. Subject to any transitional arrangement that may be contained in a possible withdrawal agreement, as of the withdrawal date, the EU rules in the field of biocidal products no longer apply to the United Kingdom. In particular, business operators should consider that, according to Union law, third countries cannot act as evaluating Member States or reference Member States
" This list of Questions and Answers (Q&A pairs) which has been drafted by the European Commission services aims at giving further guidance on the basis of the above-mentioned notice to stakeholders. The list of Q&A pairs will be further updated and complemented when necessary.
This notice replaced the notice of 13 September 2017.
Negotiations are ongoing with the United Kingdom with a view to reaching a withdrawal agreement.
With the exception of contracting States of the European Economic Area ("EEA countries") and Switzerland.
GENERAL 1. My company is currently considering submitting an application under the Regulation (EU) No 528/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 May 2012 concerning the making available on the market and use of biocidal products4, for which the UK authorities could act as evaluating Competent Authority (eCA) or reference Member State (refMS). How should we proceed? Until the withdrawal date, the United Kingdom remains a member of the European Union, with all the rights and obligations that derive from membership. Thus, you may still choose the United Kingdom as eCA/refMS.  However, as of the withdrawal date, the United Kingdom can no longer act as a eCA/refMS. This also applies if a withdrawal agreement is concluded since the United Kingdom cannot act as eCA/refMS during the transition period
Applicants should take this into account when choosing the United Kingdom as their eCA/refMS as it also implies that the file would need to be handed over to another Member State taking up the role as eCA/refMS before the withdrawal date. 2. Currently, the United Kingdom is acting as evaluating Competent Authority (eCA) or reference Member State (refMS) in an on-going regulatory procedure related to my company (e.g. active substance approval, renewal of an active substance approval, Union authorisation, simplified authorisation procedure, mutual recognition in parallel, renewal of product authorisations under Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 492/2014
or applications for minor or major changes under Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) No 354/20137). What effect will the withdrawal of the United Kingdom have on the pending process? According to Regulation (EU) No 528/2012, the role of evaluating Competent Authority (eCA) or reference Member State (refMS) is attributed to (the Competent Authority of) a Member State
However, as of the withdrawal date, the United Kingdom can no longer act as a
eCA/refMS. This also applies if a withdrawal agreement is concluded since the United Kingdom cannot act as eCA/refMS during the transition period9.
OJ L 167, 27.6.2012, p. 1
5
See Article 123(6) of the draft Withdrawal Agreement, as agreed between the EU and the United Kingdom at negotiator's level, which is available here: https://ec.europa.eu/commission/sites/beta-political/files/draft_agreement_coloured.pdf
OJ L 139, 14.5.2014, p. 1.
OJ L 109, 19.4.2013, p. 4.
Through the EEA Agreement
as well as the Mutual Recognition Agreement  with Switzerland, this is extended to further include Iceland, Liechtenstein, Norway, and Switzerland.
9
See Article 123(6) of the draft Withdrawal Agreement, as agreed between the EU and the United Kingdom at negotiator's level, which is available here: https://ec.europa.eu/commission/sites/beta-political/files/draft_agreement_coloured.pdf
Applicants in an ongoing procedure for which the United Kingdom is currently acting as eCA/refMS are advised to and to take the relevant actions. For example, if you see indications that the UK authority will not conclude the procedure by the withdrawal date, you may consider a transfer to another evaluating Member State.  The services of the European Commission and ECHA have been working with the EU-27 Member States, EEA countries and Switzerland to establish a coordinated approach to ensure a timely agreement and technical transfer of the file in case such a change is needed. The services of the European Commission and ECHA have already communicated some and will also communicate future transfers. This will be particularly relevant for the review programme of existing active substances for which the Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 1062/201410 assigned the United Kingdom as evaluating Member State (see more specific Q&A pairs below). 3. The manufacturing site of the active substance/biocidal product that my EU-27-based company is placing on the EU market is located in the United Kingdom. Do we need to be concerned about the withdrawal of the United Kingdom
Regulation (EU) No 528/2012 does not set any specific requirement regarding the location of the manufacturing site(s) of active substances or biocidal products. Therefore, manufacturing can take place in third countries. Therefore, in this regards you will not need to take any action to continue complying with Regulation (EU) No 528/2012. However, shipments to the EU of this active substance/biocidal product will be, as of the withdrawal date, importations, which may have consequences from the viewpoint of other sectorial legislation (e.g. the Regulation (EU) No 649/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 4 July 2012 concerning the export and import of hazardous chemicals11, EU customs legislation, etc.).
4. Will ECHA still grant UK-based companies a right to refer to tests or studies on vertebrates that were submitted to ECHA or to a competent authority in connection with a previous application under Regulation (EU) No 528/2012 or Directive 98/8/EC12, also after the withdrawal of the United Kingdom
The data sharing mechanism under Articles 62 and 63 of Regulation (EU) No 528/2012 will still be available to such companies, for the purposes of Regulation (EU) No 528/2012; for example, where a UK-based company intends to submit an application for active substance approval  and it requires vertebrate data for its application. In this connection, it should be stressed that it is a legal obligation for companies to make an inquiry to ECHA in the case of vertebrate data (see Article 62(2)(a) of Regulation (EU) No 528/2012).                                                            10
OJ L 294, 10.10.2014, p. 1. 11
OJ L 201, 27.7.2012, p. 60
12
Directive 98/8/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 February 1998 concerning the placing of biocidal products on the market, OJ L 123, 24.4.1998, p. 1.
5. Will the substance or product-specific data owned by my UK-based company remain protected by the data protection rules of Regulation (EU) No 528/2012 after the withdrawal of the United Kingdom
Yes. Data protection applies to all information submitted for the purposes of the Regulation (EU) No 528/2012 or its predecessor, Directive 98/8/EC, under the conditions set out in the Regulation (EU) No 528/2012
ACTIVE SUBSTANCES 6. What effect will the withdrawal of the United Kingdom have with regard to active substances that were originally evaluated by the United Kingdom and subsequently approved by the European Commission? The withdrawal of the United Kingdom will not have any effect to the validity of the approval of these active substances. 7. My company needs to submit an application for renewal of an approval of our active substance for which the United Kingdom acted as the evaluating Competent Authority (eCA) during the first approval procedure. Considering that the United Kingdom can no longer, as of the withdrawal date, act as eCA, can my company choose another competent authority as eCA? Yes. Article 13(3) of Regulation (EU) No 528/2012 does not require that the eCA for the first approval shall be the eCA for the renewal, although it is usually recommended as a means to streamline the process. The mentioned provision requires that, when you submit your application for renewal, you shall indicate the name of the competent authority that you propose for evaluating your application for renewal and provide written confirmation that that competent authority agrees to do so.  The services of the European Commission have been working in a coordinated manner with EU-27 Members States, EEA countries and Switzerland in order to identify new eCAs for concerned active substances. The services of the European Commission have already informed the original participants in the review programme about the new eCAs. ECHA will also make this information publicly available in order to inform other prospective applicants (e.g. alternative suppliers). 8. What effect does the withdrawal of the United Kingdom have with regard to applications for approval of active substances, either within or outside the review programme, that are currently being assessed by the United Kingdom
As of the withdrawal date, the United Kingdom can no longer act as the eCA. This also applies if a withdrawal agreement is concluded since the United Kingdom cannot act as eCA/refMS during the transition period.13
13
See Article 123(6) of the draft Withdrawal Agreement, as agreed between the EU and the United Kingdom at negotiator's level, which is available here: https://ec.europa.eu/commission/sites/beta-political/files/draft_agreement_coloured.pdf
5 The services of the European Commission have been working in a coordinated manner with EU-27 Members States, EEA countries and Switzerland in order to identify new eCAs for concerned existing active substances. The European Commission will adopt and publish, before the withdrawal date, an amendment to the Review Programme Regulation14 listing the existing active substances and the eCAs that will assess them. The name of the new eCAs has already been directly communicated to the participants in the review programme. The services of the European Commission have also identified new eCAs
or the assessment of pending applications for approval of those active substances that are not subject to the Review Programme Regulation (e.g. new active substances). The name of those eCAs has also been directly communicated to applicants and will be made known on the ECHA's website. 9. My UK-based company is listed as a supplier according to Article 95 of Regulation (EU) No 528/2012. With a view to the withdrawal of the United Kingdom, what do I need to do? According to Article 95(1)  of Regulation (EU) No 528/2012, substance or product suppliers listed in the Article 95 list must be established within the European Union. Therefore, you will need to appoint a representative established within the Union (or the EEA countries or Switzerland) and communicate this to ECHA (by request for correction15) in due time, so that the information on the list is updated before the withdrawal date. Otherwise, the UK supplier will be removed from the Article 95 list, and biocidal products from this source would no longer be allowed to be made available in the EU
10. I am a non-EU company and my EU representative for the purpose of Article 95 of Regulation (EU) No 528/2012 is established within the United Kingdom. With a view to the withdrawal of the United Kingdom, what do
need to do? According to Article 95(1)  of Regulation (EU) No 528/2012, substance or product suppliers listed in the Article 95 list must be established within the European Union. Therefore, you will need to appoint a new representative established within the Union (or EEA countries or Switzerland) and communicate this to ECHA (by request for correction16) in due time, so that the information on the list is updated before the withdrawal date. 11. My EU-27-based company is listed under Article 95 of Regulation (EU) No 528/2012 as a supplier of a listed active substance for which we had purchased a letter of access (LoA) from a UK-based company. Will the withdrawal of the United Kingdom 95 of Regulation (EU) No 528/2012
No. Data owners granting letters of access do not need to be EU-based.                                                              14
The draft Delegated Regulation amending the Review programme Regulation has already been made publicly available through the "Better regulation" portal of the Commission at  https://ec.europa.eu/info/law/better-regulation/initiatives/ares-2018-2382032_en
15
https://echa.europa.eu/information-on-chemicals/active-substance
uppliers
16
https://echa.europa.eu/information-on-chemicals/active-substance-suppliers

12. Will my UK-based company still be able to submit requests for active substance approval or inclusion of a substance on Annex I, after the withdrawal date
Yes, third country entities can undertake such submissions. Contrary to the case of a product authorisation, applicants for the approval of an active substance or Annex I inclusion are not "holders"/"owners" of an approval and they do not need to be established in the EU. However, you will have to get the agreement of an eCA from an EU-27 Member State
EEA country or Switzerland for the evaluation of the application.
IOCIDAL PRODUCTS 13. My UK-based company is the holder of a product authorisation in an EU-27 Member State or of a Union authorisation under Regulation (EU) No 528/2012. What effect will the withdrawal of the United Kingdom have on our authorisation? According to Article 3(1)(p) of Regulation (EU) No 528/2012, an authorisation holder must be established within the European Union. By virtue of the EEA Agreement as well as the Mutual Recognition Agreement with Switzerland, an authorisation holder can also be established in Iceland, Liechtenstein, Norway or Switzerland.  You will therefore need to transfer the authorisation to a new holder established within an EU-27 Member State or one of the afore-mentioned countries before the withdrawal date. You can trigger the amendment of your existing authorisation by means of an administrative change requiring prior notification before implementation (see point 3 in section 1 of Title I of the Annex to Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) No 354/2013). 14.
ill an EU-27 Member State, as of the withdrawal date, still be able to issue a national authorisation for a biocidal product on the basis of the mutual recognition in sequence of a UK authorisation? No. This will no longer be possible. 15. My company holds an authorisation issued by an EU-27 Member State prior to the UK withdrawal date on the basis of the mutual recognition of a UK authorisation. Will my authorisation in the EU-27 Member State be affected by the withdrawal of the United Kingdom?  No. The national authorisation granted by each EU-27 Member State will remain valid in that EU-27 Member State.  16. My company needs to apply for a change or renewal of a product authorisation granted in a mutual recognition procedure in which the United Kingdom acted as the reference Member State (refMS). Considering that, as of the withdrawal date, the United Kingdom can no longer act as refMS, can my company choose another competent authority as refMS? Yes. Both Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) No 354/2013 and Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 492/2014 allow the authorisation holder to choose another refMS for the change as well as the renewal procedure.
You will, however, need to submit within the application a written confirmation that the new competent authority agrees to act as refMS. The services of the European Commission and ECHA have been working in a coordinated manner with EU-27 Members States, EEA countries and Switzerland in order to identify new refMS
for some products of the product-types 8 and 18 for which authorisation holders had to apply for renewal before the end of 2018. The name of those refMSs has been directly communicated to the relevant holders. 17. What is the effect of the withdrawal of the United Kingdom on ongoing applications for mutual recognition in parallel for which the United Kingdom is the reference Member State? As of the withdrawal date, the United Kingdom can no longer act as reference Member State. This also applies if a withdrawal agreement is concluded since the United Kingdom cannot act as eCA/refMS during the transition period17.  Therefore, as set out in the Q&A pair No. 2, where the United Kingdom is currently acting as refMS, you are advised to carefully monitor the UK indications that the UK authority will not conclude the procedure by the withdrawal date, you may consider changing to another evaluating Member State. In this case, the new refMS will continue handling the relevant tasks referred to in Article 34 of the Regulation (EU) No 528/2012
The services of the European Commission and ECHA have been working in a coordinated manner with EU-27 Members States, EEA countries and Switzerland in order to identify new refMS
for some on-going applications. The name of those refMSs has been directly communicated to the relevant applicants
However, where no Member State takes over the role of refMS, there could be different consequences depending on the procedural stage at which the application is by the withdrawal date:
Where the United Kingdom as refMS has entered, before the withdrawal date, the elements referred to in Article 34(5) of Regulation (EU) No 528/2012 in the Register for Biocidal Products (R4BP) (i.e. the agreed summary of biocidal product characteristics (SPC) and the final assessment report, together with any agreed terms or conditions imposed on the making available on the market or use of the biocidal product), the cMSs may proceed to grant the national product authorisation in accordance with Article 34(6) of Regulation (EU) No 528/2012.
Where the current refMS (i.e. the United Kingdom) has not entered, before the withdrawal
ate, in R4BP the above-mentioned elements
the applicant will need to submit a new application for mutual recognition in parallel to a new refMS of his choice and to the relevant cMSs in accordance with Article 34(1) and (2) of Regulation (EU) No 528/2012, respectively
17
See Article 123(6) of the draft Withdrawal Agreement, as agreed between the EU and the United Kingdom at negotiator's level, which is available here: https://ec.europa.eu/commission/sites/beta-political/files/draft_agreement_coloured.pdf
18. What is the effect of the withdrawal of the United Kingdom on ongoing applications for Union authorisation for which the United Kingdom is the evaluating Competent Authority? As of the withdrawal date, the United Kingdom can no longer act as evaluating Competent Authority (eCA). This also applies if a withdrawal agreement is concluded since the United Kingdom cannot act as eCA/refMS during the transition period.18
Therefore, where the United Kingdom is currently acting as eCA, you are advised example, if you see indications that the UK authority will not conclude the procedure by the withdrawal date, you may consider changing to another eCA. In this case, the new eCA will continue handling the relevant tasks referred to in Article 44 of the Regulation (EU) No 528/2012. The services of the European Commission and ECHA have been working in a coordinated manner with EU-27 Members States, EEA countries and Switzerland in order to identify new eCA for some on-going applications. The name of those eCAs has been directly communicated to the relevant applicants. However, where no Member State takes over the role of eCA, there could be different consequences depending on the procedural stage at which the application is by the withdrawal date:
Where the peer review phase referred to in Article 44(3) of Regulation (EU) No 528/2012 has been concluded before the withdrawal date (i.e. ECHA has submitted the relevant opinion to the Commission, which includes the agreed summary of biocidal product characteristics (SPC), the final assessment report and any agreed terms or conditions imposed on the making available on the market or use of the biocidal product), the Commission may proceed to grant the Union authorisation in accordance with Article 44(5) of Regulation (EU) No 528/2012.
Where the peer review phase referred to in Article 44(3) of Regulation (EU) No 528/2012 has not been concluded before the withdrawal date (i.e. ECHA has not submitted the relevant opinion to the Commission), the applicant will need to submit a new application for Union authorisation in accordance with Article 43(1) of Regulation (EU) No 528/2012. 19. In case an application for mutual recognition in parallel or for Union authorisation is terminated and a new application has to be submitted, how would this affect the legal status of the existing products on the market with regard to Article 89(2) and (3) of Regulation (EU) No 528/2012
With the submission of the initial application assessed by the United Kingdom the applicant fulfilled his legal obligation laid down in the second subparagraph of Article 89(3) of Regulation (EU) No 528/2012. As a consequence, the existing                                                            18
See Article 123(6) of the draft Withdrawal Agreement, as agreed between the EU and the United Kingdom at negotiator's level, which is available here: https://ec.europa.eu/commission/sites/beta-political/files/draft_agreement_coloured.pdf
product(s) currently benefit from the provisions in Article 89(2) of Regulation (EU) No 528/2012
Therefore, the above-mentioned existing product(s) could continue being made available on the market and used in accordance with the provisions of Article 89(2) and (3) of Regulation (EU) No 528/2012 provided that the applicant submits a new application for mutual recognition in parallel (to a new refMS of his choice and to the same Member States concerned in accordance with Article 34(1) and (2) of Regulation (EU) No 528/2012, respectively) or a new application for Union authorisation in accordance with Article 43(1) of Regulation (EU) No 528/2012, before the withdrawal date.  20. My company handles a low risk biocidal product, authorised in the United Kingdom via the simplified procedure. May we notify the placing on the market of that product to EU-27 countries after the withdrawal of the United Kingdom
No. After the withdrawal date the authorisation granted by the United Kingdom ceases to be valid with regard to Regulation (EU) No 528/2012. As a result, the right of the authorisation holder to make the product available on the market of the notified Member States pursuant to Article 27(1) of the Regulation (EU) No 528/2012 also ceases. Therefore, your company will need to obtain a new authorisation of the product via the simplified procedure from an EU-27 Member State, an EEA country or Switzerland prior to the withdrawal of the United Kingdom
21. My company notified to a number of Member States under Article 27(1) of Regulation (EU) No 528/2012 a low risk biocidal product authorised in the United Kingdom via the simplified procedure. What effect would the withdrawal of the United Kingdom have on these notifications
As of the withdrawal date the authorisation granted by the United Kingdom ceases to be valid. Therefore, in accordance with Article 17(1) of Regulation (EU) No 528/2012, the products notified in the other Member States can no longer be made available on the market nor used.  If you want to keep your product on the market of the notified Member States, your company will need to obtain a new authorisation of the product via the simplified procedure, from an EU-27 Member State, an EEA country or Switzerland prior to the withdrawal of the United Kingdom
and then you will have to notify the other relevant Member States, EEA countries or Switzerland.
REATED ARTICLES 22. The manufacturing site of a treated article that my EU-27-based company is placing on the EU market is located in the United Kingdom. Do we need to be concerned? Regulation (EU) No 528/2012 does not set any specific requirement regarding the location of the manufacturing site(s) of treated articles, which can be manufactured in third countries. Treated articles manufactured in third countries can be placed on the EU market if they meet the conditions of Regulation (EU) No 528/2012, in particular its Articles 58 and 94. However, shipments to the EU of this treated article will be, as of the withdrawal date, importations, which may 10 have consequences from the viewpoint of other sectorial legislation (e.g. the Regulation (EU) No 649/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 4 July 2012 concerning the export and import of hazardous chemicals, EU customs legislation, etc.). 23. What will happen to a treated article that has been manufactured outside the EU and first imported into the United Kingdom before the withdrawal date, and made available on the EU-27 market after the withdrawal date
Any treated article placed on the EU market is subject to the provisions of Regulation (EU) No 528/2012, in particular Articles 58 and 94. As of the withdrawal date, shipments from the United Kingdom to the EU of this treated article will be importations. If the treated article was placed on the UK market before UK withdrawal, it can be expected to be compliant with the Regulation (EU) No 528/2012 already, and there should be no specific consequences as regards to compliance with Regulation (EU) No 528/2012 (i.e. active substance approved in the EU-27, proper labelling information etc.)
IT ISSUES
EGISTER FOR BIOCIDAL PRODUCTS (R4BP) 24. Will my UK-based company still have an access and possibility to submit a dossier via the R4BP submission tool? Yes. Companies based in third countries have access to R4PB for certain processes, e.g., active substance approval, notifications and submissions. Upon its  25. Will my UK-sible as of the withdrawal date? Yes, you will continue to have access, as non-EU companies to R4BP. UK-based companies will be able to perform the same actions allowed for non-EU companies (e.g. active substance approval submissions). 26. Will ECHA continue to grant my UK-based company access to all the information in its R4BP account after the withdrawal of the United Kingdom
UK-based companies will still have access to their data in R4BP. 27. Can a UK-based company continue to submit applications via R4BP as of the withdrawal date
A UK-that it will be able, among other things, to submit applications/notifications and monitor the progress of a given case. For instance, UK-based companies can continue to request active substance approvals (or renewals of approval) after the withdrawal of the United Kingdom. However, it is worthwhile recalling here that a biocidal product authorisation can only be granted to an EU-based company.
EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL HEALTH AND FOOD SAFETY
Brussels, 23 January 2018 Rev1
NOTICE TO STAKEHOLDER
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND EU RULES ON ANIMAL FEED The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. This means that
unless a ratified withdrawal agreement
establishes another date, all Union primary and secondary law will cease to apply to the United Kingdom from 30 March 2019, 00:00h (CET) ('the withdrawal date').
The United Kingdom will then become a 'third country'.
Preparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for EU and national authorities but also for private parties. In view of the considerable uncertainties, in particular concerning the content of a possible withdrawal agreement, business operators involved in the activities falling under the scope of animal nutrition, such as applicants and authorisation holders of feed additives, applicants requesting an update of the list of feed intended for particular nutritional purposes ("PARNUTS") and feed business operators (FBOs) intending to export to the EU, are reminded of legal repercussions, which need to be considered when the United Kingdom becomes a third country.  Subject to any transitional arrangement that may be contained in a possible withdrawal agreement, as of the withdrawal date, the EU rules in the field of animal nutrition no longer apply to the United Kingdom. This has
in particular
the following consequences in the different areas of EU feed law

pplicants (natural or legal persons) for authorisation of feed additives must be established within the EU or the European Economic Area (EEA) or designate a representative established within the EU and communicate its relevant contact details to the European Commission in accordance with Article 4(3) of Regulation (EC) No 1831/2003 on additives for use in animal nutrition;

Negotiations are ongoing with the United Kingdom with a view to reaching a withdrawal agreement.
Furthermore, in accordance with Article 50(3) of the Treaty on European Union, the European Council, in agreement with the United Kingdom, may unanimously decide that the Treaties cease to apply at a later date.
A third country is a country not member of the EU.
holders of authorisations of feed additives linked to an authorisation holder
have to designate a representative established within the EU or the EEA. The relevant contact details of the representative have to be communicated to the European Commission;  applicants for authorisations of feed additives for which the authorisation has not yet been granted by an implementing Regulation, because it is in process of evaluation or authorisation, have to designate a representative established within the EU or the EEA. The relevant contact details of the representative have to be communicated to the European Commission;  applicants for generic authorisations
of feed additives for which the authorisation has not yet been granted by an implementing Regulation because it is in process of evaluation or authorisation, have to designate a representative established within the EU or the EEA. The relevant contact details of the representative have to be communicated to the European Commission;  applicants (natural or legal persons) requesting to update the list of PARNUTs for which the authorisation is not yet granted, because it is in process of evaluation or authorisation, have to designate a representative established within the  EU or the EEA and communicate its contact details to the European Commission. In addition to applications introduced by natural or legal persons, Member States may apply to update the list of PARNUTs;   FBOs intending to export to the EU must designate a representative within the EU or the EEA for the establishments involved in that activity. In accordance with EU legislation on official controls and on feed hygiene, Member States are responsible for the authorisation of such imports from third countries. The representatives have certain obligations that should be considered by FBOs when exporting to the EU.  Applicants, holders of authorisations and FBOs will need to act sufficiently in advance to avoid any impact on the continuous supply of feed within the European Union. The necessary information will need to be submitted in due time considering the procedural timelines foreseen in the regulatory framework. The website of the Commission on animal feed (https://ec.europa.eu/food/safety/animal-feed_en) provides general information on animal feed as well as a series of "Questions and answers" in relation to animal nutrition. These pages will be updated with further information, where necessary.
European Commission
Directorate-General Health and Food Safety
Additives containing, consisting of or produced from GMOs, zootechnical additives, coccidiostats and histomonostats.
Technological additives, sensory additives and nutritional additives.
EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL FOR HEALTH AND FOOD SAFETY
Brussels, 13 November 2018 REV1  Replaces the Q&A document published on 21 September 2017
UESTIONS AND ANSWERS RELATED TO THE UNITED KINGDOM'S WITHDRAWAL FROM THE EUROPEAN UNION WITH REGARD EU RULES ON ANIMAL FEED On 23 January 2018, the European Commission services published a "Notice to stakeholders
Withdrawal of the United Kingdom and EU rules on animal feed
1 This notice recalled the following:
The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. This means that
unless a ratified withdrawal agreement
establishes another date, all Union primary and secondary law will cease to apply to the United Kingdom from 30 March 2019, 00:00h (CET) ('the withdrawal date')
The United Kingdom will then become a 'third country'.
Preparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for EU and national authorities but also for private parties.  In view of the considerable uncertainties, in particular concerning the content of a possible withdrawal agreement, business operators involved in the activities falling under the scope of animal nutrition, such as applicants and authorisation holders of feed additives, applicants requesting an update of the list of feed intended for particular nutritional purposes ("PARNUTS") and feed business operators (FBOs) intending to export to the EU, are reminded of legal repercussions, which need to be considered when the United Kingdom becomes a third country.  Subject to any transitional arrangement that may be contained in a possible withdrawal agreement, as of the withdrawal date, the EU rules in the field of animal nutrition no longer apply to the United Kingdom.
This list of Questions and Answers (Q&A pairs) which has been drafted by the European Commission services, aims at giving further guidance on the basis of the above-
https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness/preparedness-notices_en#sante.
Negotiations are ongoing with the United Kingdom with a view to reaching a withdrawal agreement.
Furthermore, in accordance with Article 50(3) of the Treaty on European Union, the European Council, in agreement with the United Kingdom, may unanimously decide that the Treaties cease to apply at a later date.
A third country is a country not member of the EU
2 mentioned notice to stakeholders. The list of Q&A pairs will be further updated and complemented when necessary. 1.
HAT ARE THE EU RULES FOR FEED
Four different pieces of feed legislation lay down requirements for non-EU countries that will entail certain obligations for UK feed business operators (FBOs) as regards:
perators intending to export to the EU
Regulation (EC) No 183/2005 laying down requirements for feed hygiene
and Commission Directive 98/51/EC
Applicants for an authorisation of feed additives: Regulation (EC) No 1831/2003 on additives for use in animal nutrition;

pplicants for the authorisation of particular nutritional purposes (PARNUTs): Regulation (EC) No 767/2009 on the placing on the market and use of fee
8 2.
PERATORS INTENDING TO EXPORT TO THE EU 2.1. What are the requirements for importing feed into the EU?  The list of third countries from which feed may be imported into the EU
is not yet drawn up. In accordance with Article 24 of Regulation (EC) No 183/2005, the conditions set out in Article 6 of Commission Directive 98/51/EC10 apply, which provide for the following

hird country establishments must have a representative established in the European Union;
Regulation (EC) No 183/2005 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 January 2005 laying down requirements for feed hygiene
OJ L 35, 8.2.2005, p. 1.

ommission Directive 98/51/EC of 9 July 1998 laying down certain measures for implementing Council Directive 95/69/EC laying down the conditions and arrangements for approving and registering certain establishments and intermediaries operating in the animal feed sector
OJ L 208, 24.7.1998, p. 43.  This Directive was repealed by Regulation (EC) No 183/2005; however interim measures apply pursuant to Article 24 thereof.
Regulation (EC) No 1831/2003 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 September 2003 on additives for use in animal nutrition
OJ L 268, 18.10.2003, p. 29.
Regulation (EC) No 767/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 July 2009 on the placing on the market and use of feed, OJ L 229, 1.9.2009, p.

Article 23 of Regulation (EC) No 183/2005
10
Commission Directive 98/51/EC of 9 July 1998 laying down certain measures for implementing Council Directive 95/69/EC laying down the conditions and arrangements for approving and registering certain establishments and intermediaries operating in the animal feed sector, OJ L 208, 24.7.1998, p. 43

he representative must ensure that the establishments comply with feed hygiene requirements at least equivalent to those established in the EU

he representative must keep a register of products placed on the EU market from the establishments that he represents.   3.
UTHORISATION OF FEED ADDITIVES LINKED TO AN AUTHORISATION HOLDER 3.1. I am a UK operator that applied for an authorisation for a feed additive linked to an authorisation holder but my product is not yet authorised. Do I have any obligation?  According to Article 3(3) of Regulation (EC) No 1831/2003, with regard to certain additives11 no person other than the holder of the authorisation shall first place the product on the market. The name of the authorisation holder is included in the Regulation granting the authorisation of those additives.12
According to Article 4 of Regulation (EC) No 1831/2003, the applicant for an authorisation or his representative shall be established in the EU. Therefore, where the applicant for an authorisation or his representative is currently established in the United Kingdom, the applicant should establish in the EU or designate a representative established in the EU. The relevant new contact details should be communicated to the European Commission.  3.2. What are the obligations for a UK holder of an authorisation of a feed additive already authorised?
According to Article 4 of Regulation (EC) No 1831/2003, the applicant for an authorisation or his representative shall be established in the EU. Therefore, a holder established in the UK should establish in the EU or designate a representative established in the EU.
he authorisation has to be amended accordingly. The authorisation holder should communicate the relevant contact details to the European Commission, so that the Commission can take steps to amend the Regulation authorising the additive following the procedure laid down in Article 13(3) of Regulation (EC) No 1831/2003. This procedure requires some months to be completed (around 4 months)
therefore, UK holders of authorisation must start the procedure well in advance so it is completed before the withdrawal date
11
Additives linked to an authorisation holder are those containing, consisting of or produced from GMOs and additives belonging to the following categories: zootechnical additives, coccidiostats and histomonostats
12
Article 9(6) of Regulation (EC) No 1831/2003
4 4.
UTHORISATION OF GENERIC FEED ADDITIVES  For feed additives that are not linked to a specific authorisation holder (i.e. feed additives other than those referred to in section 3) ("generic feed additives")13 the following applies:   According to Article 4(3) of Regulation (EC) No 1831/2003, an applicant for an authorisation or his representative shall be established in the EU. If the authorisation has not yet been granted, the applicant established in the United Kingdom should establish in the EU or designate
in accordance with Article 7(1)
a representative established in the EU and communicate their relevant contact details to the European Commission
The same applies
according to Article 13(5) of Regulation (EC) No 1831/2003, where applicants request a new use, a modification or a renewal of an authorisation
If the additive is already authorised, the (former) applicant does not need to be established in the EU or designate a representative in the EU.  5. LIST OF INTENDED USES OF FEED INTENDED FOR PARTICULAR NUTRITIONAL PURPOSES (PARNUT
The applications for PARNUTs are regulated in Articles 9 and 10 of Regulation (EC) No 767/2009. According to Article 10(2) of Regulation (EC) No 767/2009, an applicant for updating the list of intended uses has to be established in the EU.  If the authorisation is not yet granted, the applicant has to be established in the EU.  If the PARNUT is already authorised, the (former) applicant does not need to be established in the EU
13
Technological additives, sensory additives
and nutritional additives
See Annex I to Regulation (EC) No 1831/2003.
Commission européenne/Europese Commissie, 1049 Bruxelles/Brussel, BELGIQUE/BELGIË
Tel. +32 22991111
EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL FOR HEALTH AND FOOD SAFETY

Brussels, 23 January 2018
OTICE TO STAKEHOLDERS
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND EU RULES ON GENETICALLY MODIFIED FOOD AND FEED AND THE DELIBERATE RELEASE OF GENETICALLY MODIFIED ORGANISMS INTO THE ENVIRONMENT
The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. This means that
unless a ratified withdrawal agreement
establishes another date, all Union primary and secondary law will cease to apply to the United Kingdom from 30 March 2019, 00:00h (CET) ('the withdrawal date')2. The United Kingdom will then become a 'third country'. In this regard, business operators involved in the activities falling under the scope of Regulation (EC) No 1829/2003 on genetically modified food and feed and Directive 2001/18/EC on the deliberate release of genetically modified organisms into the environment are reminded that preparing for the withdrawal is therefore not just a matter for European and national authorities, but also for private parties.  In view of the considerable uncertainties, in particular concerning the content of a possible withdrawal agreement, authorisation holders and applicants are reminded of certain legal repercussions, which need to be considered when the United Kingdom becomes a third country.
Subject to any transitional arrangement that may be contained in a possible withdrawal agreement, as of the withdrawal date, the EU rules in the field of genetically modified food and feed and the deliberate release of genetically modified organisms into the environment no longer apply in the United Kingdom. This has, in particular, the following consequences in the different areas of genetically modified food and feed and the deliberate release of genetically modified organisms:
-
nder Regulation (EC) No 1829/2003, authorisation holders or their representatives must be established in the European Union (or in one of the contracting states of the European Economic Area)

Negotiations are ongoing with the United Kingdom with a view to reaching a withdrawal agreement.
Furthermore, in accordance with Article 50(3) of the Treaty on European Union, the European Council, in agreement with the United Kingdom, may unanimously decide that the Treaties cease to apply at a later date.
2
applications for the placing on the market of genetically-modified organisms under Directive 2001/18/EC must designate a person responsible for the placing on the market which must be established in the European Union (or in one of the contracting states of the European Economic Area)
Business operators should consider that applications and notifications pursuant to Regulation (EC) No 1829/2003 and Directive 2001/18/EC can only be submitted to the competent authorities of EU Member States (or of contracting states of the European Economic Area)
In particular, business operators should carefully take into account the expected timelines before the submission of any new application in which the United Kingdom would be acting as rapporteur Member State under Directive 2001/18/EC.  The website of the Commission on food safety provide
general information concerning genetically modified food and feed and the deliberate release of genetically modified organisms into the environment. If necessary, Questions & Answers (Q&A) in relation to Regulation (EC) No 1829/2003 and Directive 2001/18/EC will be made available.
European Commission Directorate-General Health and Food Safety
EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL HEALTH AND FOOD SAFETY
Brussels, XXX
OTICE TO STAKEHOLDER
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND EU RULES IN THE FIELD OF DIRECTIVE 2009/54/EC OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE
OUNCIL OF 18
UNE 2009 ON THE EXPLOITATION AND MARKETING OF NATURAL MINERAL WATERS The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. This means that
unless a ratified withdrawal agreement
establishes another date, all Union primary and secondary law will cease to apply to the United Kingdom from 30 March 2019, 00:00h (CET) ('the withdrawal date').
The United Kingdom will then become a 'third country'.
Preparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for EU and national authorities but also for private parties.  In view of the considerable uncertainties, in particular concerning the content of a possible withdrawal agreement
food business operators in the field of the exploitation and marketing of natural mineral waters are reminded of legal repercussions, which need to be considered when the United Kingdom becomes a third country
Subject to any transitional arrangement that may be contained in a possible withdrawal agreement, as of the withdrawal date, the EU rules in the field of the exploitation and marketing of natural mineral waters apply to the United Kingdom as third country. This has
in particular
the following consequences in the different areas of the natural mineral water legislation
According to Article 1(1) and (2) and Article 2 of Directive 2009/54/EC, waters may only be marketed as natural mineral waters in the European Union if they comply with the following:
where waters are extracted from the ground of a Member State, the responsible authority of that Member State has recognised the waters as natural mineral waters in accordance with Directive 2009/54/EC
Negotiations are ongoing with the United Kingdom with a view to reaching a withdrawal agreement.
Furthermore, in accordance with Article 50(3) of the Treaty on European Union, the European Council, in agreement with the United Kingdom, may unanimously decide that the Treaties cease to apply at a later date.
A third country is a country not member of the EU.
2
where waters are extracted from the ground of a third country, the responsible authority of a Member State has recognised the waters as natural mineral waters in accordance with Directive 2009/54/EC. It follows that, from the withdrawal date:
Waters currently extracted from the ground of, and recognised by the United Kingdom as natural mineral waters shall be considered as extracted from the ground of a third country and should no longer be authorised for import into the European Union, unless they are recognised as such by the responsible authority of another Member State
- Waters currently extracted from the ground of a third country and recognised as natural mineral waters by the responsible authority of the United Kingdom should no longer be authorised for import into the European Union, unless they are recognised as such by the responsible authority of another Member State
The website of the Commission on Health and Food Safety provide
general information concerning the rules o
the exploitation and marketing of natural mineral waters. These pages will be updated with further information, where necessary.
European Commission
irectorate
eneral Health and Food Safety

EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL HEALTH AND FOOD SAFETY
Brussels, 23 January 2018
OTICE TO STAKEHOLDER
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND EU RULES IN THE FIELD OF MARKETING OF SEEDS AND OTHER PLANT REPRODUCTIVE PROPAGATING MATERIAL The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. This means that
unless a ratified withdrawal agreement
establishes another date, all Union primary and secondary law will cease to apply to the United Kingdom from 30 March 2019, 00:00h (CET) ('the withdrawal date').
The United Kingdom will then become a 'third country'.
Preparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for EU and national authorities but also for private parties.  In view of the considerable uncertainties, in particular concerning the content of a possible withdrawal agreement
all breeders and suppliers of seeds and other plant reproductive material covered by Directives 66/401/EEC (fodder plants), 66/402/EEC (cereals), 68/193/EEC (vine), 98/56/EC (ornamentals), 1999/105/EC (forest reproductive material), 2002/53/EC (Common Catalogue of agricultural varieties), 2002/54/EC (beet), 2002/55/EC (vegetable seeds), 2002/56/EC (potato seeds), 2002/57/EC (oil and fibre plants), 2008/72/EC (vegetable propagating material) and 2008/90/EC (fruit plants) are reminded of legal repercussions, which need to be considered when the United Kingdom becomes a third country
Subject to any transitional arrangement that may be contained in a possible withdrawal agreement, as of the withdrawal date, the EU rules in the field of marketing of plant reproductive material no longer apply to the United Kingdom. This has
in particular
the following consequences in the fields of inclusion in Common Catalogues and marketing
Inclusion in Common Catalogues or national registry (catalogue, register or list) All breeders and suppliers concerned by the marketing of the seed and propagating material mentioned above are reminded of certain legal repercussions, which need to be considered for the possible actions:
Varieties of agricultural and vegetable species have to be maintained in an EU-27-Member State in order for their seed to be allowed to be marketed within the Union.
Negotiations are ongoing with the United Kingdom with a view to reaching a withdrawal agreement.
2
Furthermore, in accordance with Article 50(3) of the Treaty on European Union, the European Council, in agreement with the United Kingdom, may unanimously decide that the Treaties cease to apply at a later date.
3
A third country is a country not member of the EU.
According to the above mentioned legislation, varieties of fodder plant seed, cereal seed, beet seed, vegetable seed, vegetable propagating material, seed potatoes and seed of oil and fibre plants (agricultural and vegetable species) must be examined and accepted by at least one Member State and listed in the Common Catalogues of Directive 2002/53/EC or Directive 2002/55/EC to be allowed to be marketed throughout the Union. Varieties that have been included in the Common Catalogues by the United Kingdom only must be accepted by another Member State in order for the varieties to remain in those Common Catalogues in order to continue to be allowed to be marketed in the EU after the withdrawal date. The interested parties should thus submit the respective applications to the responsible official body of an EU-27-Member State in a timely manner before that date, in order to ensure that those varieties are also inserted in a timely manner in the respective Common Catalogues.  Pursuant to Directive 68/193/EEC on vine propagating material, Directive 1999/105/EC on forest reproductive material, Directive 2008/90/EC on fruit propagating material, varieties or forest basic material may only be marketed throughout the Union once they are included in the national registry in one Member State or
in the case of Directive 1998/56/EC on ornamental propagating material  at least in a suppliers list of an EU-27 Member State. Varieties or basic material of forest plants included in the registry of United Kingdom only must be accepted by another Member State or supplier in another Member States in order for those varieties or material to continue to be allowed to be marketed in the EU after the withdrawal date. The interested parties should thus submit the respective applications to the responsible official body or supplier of an EU27-Member State in a timely manner before that date, in order to ensure that those varieties or material are inserted in a timely manner in the national registry or suppliers list.  Several varieties intended for inclusion in the Common Catalogue of Directives 2002/53/EC or 2002/55/EC are currently being tested in premises of the United Kingdom (at the request of either breeders or of examination offices of EU-27 Member States on the basis of bilateral testing arrangements). Breeders should be aware that after the withdrawal date
the examination results have to stem from examinations in an E
27 Member State for the variety to be included in the Common Catalogues or national registry. Breeders should also bear in mind that, in addition to examinations for DUS (Distinctness, Uniformity and Stability) where all Member States apply the same requirements, certain varieties will also need additional examinations for VCU (Value for Cultivation and Use) where the requirements of certain Member States might be different from the requirements of the United Kingdom. Marketing of seed and propagating material According to the aforementioned legislation, imports of seed and propagating material from third countries are subject to the respective provisions of each Directive concerning recognition of equivalent requirements of third countries.
Finally, stakeholders should be aware that preparing for the withdrawal of the United Kingdom is not just a matter for European and national administrations, but also for private parties. Breeders may thus be required to monitor the developments, adapt processes and to consider the changes described above.
3 The website of the Commission, Directorate General 'Health and Food Safety' on Plant Reproductive Material provide
general information concerning that matter4. These pages will be updated with further information, where necessary.
European Commission Directorate-General Health and Food Safety

https://ec.europa.eu/food/plant/plant_propagation_material_en
EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL HEALTH AND FOOD SAFETY
Brussels, 16 January 2018
OTICE TO STAKEHOLDER
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND EU RULES IN THE FIELD OF
REEDING OF ANIMALS The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. This means that
unless the withdrawal agreement
establishes another date
all Union primary and secondary law ceases to apply to the United Kingdom from 30 March 2019, 00:00h (CET) ("the withdrawal date")2. The United Kingdom would then become a 'third country'
Preparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for EU and national authorities but also for private parties. In view of the considerable uncertainties, in particular concerning the content of a possible withdrawal agreement, all breeders referred to in Article 2(5) and (6) of Regulation (EU) 2016/1012 of the European Parliament and of the Council
are reminded of legal repercussions , which need to be considered when the United Kingdom becomes a third country
Subject to any transitional arrangement that may be contained in a possible withdrawal agreement, as of the withdrawal date, the EU rules in the field of Regulation (EU) 2016/1012 on zootechnical and genealogical conditions for the breeding, trade in and entry into the Union of purebred breeding animals of the bovine, ovine, caprine, porcine and equine species, hybrid breeding pigs and the germinal products thereof no longer apply to the United Kingdom. This has
in particular
the following consequences in the different areas of animal breeding

Negotiations are ongoing with the United Kingdom with a view to reaching a withdrawal agreement.
2
Furthermore, in accordance with Article 50(3) of the Treaty on European Union, the European Council, in agreement with the United Kingdom, may unanimously decide that the Treaties cease to apply at a later date.
3
A third country is a country not member of the EU.
4
Regulation (EU) 2016/1012 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 8 June 2016 on zootechnical and genealogical conditions for the breeding, trade in and entry into the Union of purebred breeding animals, hybrid breeding pigs and the germinal products thereof and amending Regulation (EU) No 652/2014, Council Directives 89/608/EEC and 90/425/EEC and repealing certain acts in the area of animal breedin
OJ L 171, 29.6.2016, p. 66

As of the withdrawal date, breed societies and breeding operations in the United Kingdom will no longer be listed in accordance with Article 7 of Regulation (EU) 2016/1012.   As of the withdrawal date, purebred breeding animals and hybrid breeding pigs, or the offspring of germinal products of those animals, may only be entered in breeding books or registered in breeding registers established in Member States of EU-27, if they were accompanied by a zootechnical certificate in accordance with Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2017/7175, issued by a breeding body in the United Kingdom if listed in accordance with Article 34 of Regulation (EU) 2016/1012.  Breeders who have their breeding animals entered in breeding books established by breed societies or registered in breeding registers established by breeding operations recognised in the United Kingdom may consider to enter or register those animals before the withdrawal date (also) in the appropriate breeding books and registers established for the same breed or cross in a Member State of EU-27
Equidae imported into a Member State of EU-27 from the United Kingdom after the withdrawal date shall be identified
as any equidae imported from other third countries
in accordance with Articles 14 and 15 of Regulation (EU) 2015/262
The website of the Commission on "Zootechnics"
provides general information concerning animal breeding and specific information on approved breeding organisations and breeders associations that keep herdbooks for different breeds
The website of the Commission on identification of equine animals
provides general information concerning the identification of equidae and specific information on issuing bodies for identification documents for equidae. These pages will be updated with further information, where necessary.
European Commission
Directorate-General Health and Food Safety

Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2017/717 of 10 April 2017 laying down rules for the application of Regulation (EU) 2016/1012 of the European Parliament and of the Council with regard to the model forms of zootechnical certificates for breeding animals and their germinal products (OJ L 109, 26.4.2017, p. 9).
6
Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2015/262 of 17 February 2015 laying down rules pursuant to Council Directives 90/427/EEC and 2009/156/EC as regards the methods for the identification of equidae (Equine Passport Regulation) (OJ L 59, 3.3.2015, p. 1).
7
https://ec.europa.eu/food/animals/zootechnics/legislation_en
8
https://ec.europa.eu/food/animals/identification/equine_en
EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL FOR HEALTH AND FOOD SAFETY
Brussels, 27 February 2018
OTICE TO STAKEHOLDER
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND EU RULES ON ANIMAL HEALTH AND WELFARE AND PUBLIC HEALTH RELATED TO THE MOVEMENT OF LIVE ANIMALS The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. This means that
unless a ratified withdrawal agreement
establishes another date, all Union primary and secondary law will cease to apply to the United Kingdom from 30 March 2019, 00:00h (CET) ('the withdrawal date').
The United Kingdom will then become a 'third country'.
Preparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for EU and national authorities but also for private parties.  In view of the considerable uncertainties, in particular concerning the content of a possible withdrawal agreement, operators involved in trade in live animals
are reminded of legal repercussions, which need to be considered when the United Kingdom becomes a third country

Subject to any transitional arrangement that may be contained in a possible withdrawal agreement, as of the withdrawal date, the EU public and animal health rules in the field
Negotiations are ongoing with the United Kingdom with a view to reaching a withdrawal agreement.
Furthermore, i
accordance with Article 50(3) of the Treaty on European Union, the European Council, in agreement with the United Kingdom, may unanimously decide that the Treaties cease to apply at a later date.
A third country is a country not member of the EU.
This notice does not address non-commercial movements of pet animals (Regulation (EU) No 576/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 June 2013 on the non-commercial movement of pet animals, OJ L 178, 28.6.2013, p. 1).
For live animals the movement of which is ongoing on the withdrawal date, the EU is trying to agree solutions with the United Kingdom in the withdrawal agreement. The essential principles of the EU's position on goods
laced on the market, including live animals the movement of which has started before the withdrawal date are available here:
https://ec.europa.eu/commission/publications/position-paper-goods-placed-market-under-union-law-withdrawal-date_en
6
Since the EU veterinary acquis is very detailed, this notice can only set out the essential rules. The website of the Commission on imports of live animals (https://ec.europa.eu/food/animals/live_animals_en) provide
for general information concerning EU animal health legislation for imported live animals.
2 of intra-Union trade in live animals
8
10 11, the placing on the market of aquaculture animals,12 the controls carried out on such movements13 and EU law on animal transport14 no longer apply to the United Kingdom.  This notice is also relevant for the movement of live animals and hatching eggs from and to the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man.15 1.
NTRY OF LIVE ANIMALS INTO THE EU Public and animal health: As of the withdrawal date, the entry of live animals16 17from the United Kingdom into the EU-27 is prohibited for public and animal health reasons, unless:
Council Directive 64/432/EEC of 26 June 1964 on animal health problems affecting intra-Community trade in bovine animals and swine (OJ 121, 29.7.1964, p. 1977/64).
Council Directive 91/68/EEC of 28 January 1991 on animal health conditions governing intra-Community trade in ovine and caprine animals (OJ L 46, 19.2.1991, p. 19).
Council Directive 2009/156/EC of 30 November 2009 on animal health conditions governing the movement and importation from third countries of equidae (OJ L 192, 23.7.2010, p. 1)
10
Council Directive 2009/158/EC of 30 November 2009 on animal health conditions governing intra-Community trade in, and imports from third countries of, poultry and hatching eggs (OJ L 343, 22.12.2009, p. 74). 11   Council Directive 92/65/EEC of 13 July 1992 laying down animal health requirements governing trade in and imports into the Community of animals, semen, ova and embryos not subject to animal health requirements laid down in specific Community rules referred to in Annex A (I) to Directive 90/425/EEC (OJ L 268, 14.9.1992, p. 54). 12
Council Directive 2006/88/EC of 24 October 2006 on animal health requirements for aquaculture animals and products thereof, and on the prevention and control of certain diseases in aquatic animals OJ L 328, 24.11.2006, p. 14). 13
Council Directive 90/425/EEC of 26 June 1990 concerning veterinary and zootechnical checks applicable in intra
Community trade in certain live animals and products with a view to the completion of the internal market (OJ L 224, 18.8.1990, p. 29). 14
Council Regulation (EC) No 1/2005 of 22 December 2004 on the protection of animals during transport and related operations (OJ L 3, 5.1.2005, p. 1). 15
Regulation (EEC) No 706/73 of the Council of 12 March 1973 concerning the Community arrangements applicable to the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man for trade in agricultural products (OJ L 68, 15.3.1973. p. 1). 16
Cattle, pigs, sheep and goats, equidae, poultry and hatching eggs, aquaculture animals, bees and bumble bees, other "ungulates" listed in Directive 2004/68/EC. Dogs, cats and ferrets in commercial movements.  17
For other animals than those in footnote 16, including certain animals consigned to and from bodies, institutes or centres approved in accordance with Annex C to Directive 92/65/EEC, national animal health conditions may apply to the entry from third countries of animals (Article 18(2) of Directive 92/65/EEC). However, the EU rules on border checks apply.
3  The United Kingdom is "listed" as a third country by the Commission for animal health18 purposes. For the "listing", Directive 2004/68/EC as well as specific legislation applies;  The specific animal health requirements and veterinary certification conditions set out with the "listing" for the species or categories of animals from the United Kingdom are fulfilled
The United Kingdom is "listed" by the Commission as a third country having a residue control plan approved in accordance with Directive 96/23/EC19 for the animals and animal products specified therein. For the "listing" Chapter VI of Directive 96/23/EC applies. The "Tripartite Agreement" concluded in accordance with Article 6 of Directive 2009/156/EC between France, Ireland and the United Kingdom no longer applies to the United Kingdom
s of the withdrawal date
As of the withdrawal date, these substantial requirements are controlled upon entry into the EU-27 by applying mandatory border checks, including veterinary checks, at the first point of entry into the Union territory:   Live animals can only enter the EU-27 through "border inspection posts"20 approved for the species and categories of animals concerned;  Each consignment has to be accompanied by a duly completed health certificate in compliance with EU animal health import legislation;21  Each consignment undergoes documentary, identity and physical checks;22  Live animals are only allowed to enter the EU-27 with the official document (Common Veterinary Entry Document) attesting that the border checks were satisfactorily carried out in compliance with the applicable animal and, public health rules.
These conditions also apply to the entry into the EU-27, as of the withdrawal date, of live animals from the United Kingdom for the purpose of transit from the United Kingdom to another third country or to another part of the United Kingdom.23 In addition, the                                                  18
Council Directive 2004/68/EC of 26 April 2004 laying down animal health rules for the importation into and transit through the Community of certain live ungulate animals (OJ L 139, 30.4.2004, p. 321). For equidae, poultry, aquaculture animals, and other animals see footnotes above. 19
Council Directive 96/23/EC of 29 April 1996 on measures to monitor certain substances and residues thereof in live animals and animal products (OJ L 125, 23.5.1996, p. 10). 20
Commission Decision 2009/821/EC of 28 September 2009 drawing up a list of approved border inspection posts, laying down certain rules on the inspections carried out by Commission veterinary experts and laying down the veterinary units in Traces
OJ L 296, 12.11.2009, p. 1). 21
Article 4 of Council Directive 91/496/EEC
22
Article 4 of Council Directive 91/496/EEC. 23
For equidae, specific transit rules are laid down in Commission Decision 2010/57/EU of 3 February 2010 laying down health guarantees for the transit of equidae being transported through the territories listed in Annex I to Council Directive 97/78/EC (OJ L 32, 4.2.2010, p. 9).
4 consignment has to pass through border inspection post
both at entry into and  exit from the Union, including the respective notifications in the EU Trade Control and Expert System (TRACES).24 25 In case of transit from the EU-27 through the United Kingdom to the EU-27, live animals have to be accompanied by an intra-Union trade certificate and pass through a border inspection post at entry into the EU-27, including the respective notifications in TRACES.26 27
Animal welfare:
ive animals admitted to enter the EU-27 will have to be transported according to all the animal welfare rules laid down in Council Regulation (EC) No 1/200528, and will be submitted to checks at border inspection posts by the competent authorities as laid down in Article 21 of that Regulation.29 2.
XIT OF LIVE ANIMALS FROM THE EU Public and animal health: As of the withdrawal date, the exit of live animals30 from a Member State to the United Kingdom through the territory of another Member State is subject to the following conditions:
he transport operation must ensure that in accordance with Decision 93/444/EEC31 the consignment remain
under customs supervision up to the point of exit32 from Union territory
24
Commission Decision 2003/623/EC of 19 August 2003 concerning the development of an integrated computerised veterinary system known as Traces (OJ L 216, 28.8.2003, p. 58). 25
Article 9 of Council Directive 91/496/EEC of 15 July 1991 laying down the principles governing the organization of veterinary checks on animals entering the Community from third countries (OJ L 268, 24.9.1991, p. 56). 26
In addition, for the transit of certain ungulates, Article 12 of Commission Regulation (EC) No 206/2010 applies. 27
In addition, the rules on exit of live animals apply, see section 2 of this Notice. 28
Council Regulation (EC) No 1/2005 of 22 December 2004 on the protection of animals during transport and related operations (OJ L 3, 5.1.2005, p. 1). 29
See also the Commission Notice to stakeholders withdrawal of the United Kingdom and EU rules for authorisations and certificates for transporters of live animals, drivers and attendants (https://ec.europa.eu/food/animals/welfare/practice/transport_en). 30
Cattle, pigs, sheep, goats, equidae, poultry and hatching eggs, dogs, cats and ferrets, bees and bumble bees and aquaculture animals
31
Commission Decision 93/444/EEC of 2 July 1993 on detailed rules governing intra-Community trade in certain live animals and products intended for exportation to third countries (OJ L 208, 19.8.1993, p. 34). For the exit of live animals to a third country without passing through another Member State, no specific EU rules apply.
5
ach consignment of animals is accompanied by veterinary documents or veterinary certificates meeting relevant veterinary requirements of the United Kingdom and health certificates for intra-Union trade, which contain, where necessary and applicable, the additional guarantees provided for by Union legislation for animals intended for slaughter

message must be addressed in TRACES to the place of destination, which is the border inspection post of exit or the local authority of the place in which the point of exit is situated, and to the central authorities of the place of destination and of the Member State(s) of transit.
Animal welfare: The transport of live animals exiting the EU to the United Kingdom will have to comply with Council Regulation (EC) No 1/2005 up to the final place of destination and will be submitted to checks at the exit point by the competent authorities as laid down in Article 21 of that Regulation. Private parties are advised that the specific conditions regarding the movement and importation of live animals are regularly updated.  The website of the Commission on imports of live animals (https://ec.europa.eu/food/animals/live_animals_en) provide
for general information concerning EU animal health legislation for imported live animals. These pages will be updated with further information, where necessary.   European Commission Directorate-General for Health and Food Safety
32
In accordance with Article 1(2)(a) of Decision 93/444/EEC "exit point
means any place situated in close proximity to the external frontier of one of the territories listed in Annex I to Council Directive 90/675/EEC (5) offering customs supervision facilities.
EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL FOR HEALTH AND FOOD SAFETY
Brussels, 21 March 2018
OTICE TO STAKEHOLDER
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND EU RULES ON PLANT HEALTH  The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. This means that
unless a ratified withdrawal agreement
establishes another date, all Union primary and secondary law will cease to apply to the United Kingdom from 30 March 2019, 00:00h (CET) ('the withdrawal date').
The United Kingdom will then become a 'third country'.
Preparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for EU and national authorities but also for private parties.  In view of the considerable uncertainties, in particular concerning the content of a possible withdrawal agreement, operators involved in production and trade of plants, plant products and other objects addressed in the EU plant health legislation ("other objects") are reminded of legal repercussions, which need to be considered when the United Kingdom becomes a third country
Subject to any transitional arrangement that may be contained in a possible withdrawal agreement, as of the withdrawal date, the EU plant health legislation in the field of intra-Union trade in plants, plant products and other objects no longer apply to the United Kingdom.
The legal consequences presented below stem from EU plant health legislation with regard to plants
plant products or other objects placed on the EU-27 market
as from the withdrawal date and coming from a third country (i.e. imported).

Negotiations are ongoing with the United Kingdom with a view to reaching a withdrawal agreement.
Furthermore, in accordance with Article 50(3) of the Treaty on European Union, the European Council, in agreement with the United Kingdom, may unanimously decide that the Treaties cease to apply at a later date.
A third country is a country not member of the EU.
This notice does not address the EU rules on plant reproductive material (which is addressed in the Notice to stakeholders on the withdrawal of the United Kingdom and EU rules in the field of marketing of seeds and other plant reproductive material of 23 January 2018) nor plant variety rights (which is addressed in the Notice to stakeholders on the withdrawal of the United Kingdom and EU rules in the field of Union plant variety rights of 23 January 2018).
For goods, including plants, plant products and other objects placed on the EU market before the withdrawal date, the EU is trying to agree solutions with the United Kingdom in the withdrawal agreement. The essential principles of the EU's position on goods, including plants, placed on the market under Union law before the withdrawal date are available here:
This notice is also relevant for
lants
plant products or other objects coming from the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man.
1.
NTRODUCTION OF PLANTS
PLANT PRODUCTS OR OTHER OBJECTS INTO THE EU According to Article 4 of Council Directive 2000/29/EC8, the introduction into the Union of certain plants, plant products and other objects listed in Parts A and B of Annex III to Directive 2000/29/EC into the Union is prohibited.  According to Article 5 of Directive 2000/29/EC, certain plants, plant products and other objects listed in Part A of Annex IV to Directive 2000/29/EC may only be introduced into the Union if they comply with the special requirements set out in that Part. As of the withdrawal date, the introduction of plants
plant products and other objects from the United Kingdom into the EU-27 will be governed by this Directive. This is in particular relevant for the introduction into the EU of wood packaging material: such wood packaging, whether or not actually in use for the transport of objects of all kinds, has to be compliant with a treatment and mark as specified in the FAO International Standard for Phytosanitary measures No 15 ('ISPM 15').
2.
FFICIAL CONTROLS FOR IMPORTS OF PLANTS
PLANT PRODUCTS OR OTHER OBJECTS According to Article 13 of Directive 2000/29/EC, the plants, plant products or other objects listed in Part B of Annex V to that Directive, introduced into the EU shall be accompanied by a phytosanitary certificate. According to Article 13a, each of those commodities shall be subject to a meticulous documentary, identity and physical check
Article 13a also lays down that for certain plant categories reduced                                                                                                                                                  https://ec.europa.eu/commission/publications/position-paper-goods
laced-market-under-union-law-withdrawal-date_en
Please note that the essential principles of the EU's position on goods build on one single definition of "placing on the market" ("first making available on the market").
This notice does not address the EU rules for small quantities of plants and plant products accompanying travellers.
Regulation (EEC) No 706/73 of the Council of 12 March 1973 concerning the Community arrangements applicable to the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man for trade in agricultural products (OJ L 68, 15.3.1973. p. 1).
Council Directive 2000/29/EC of 8 May 2000 on protective measures against the introduction into the Community of organisms harmful to plants or plant products and against their spread within the Community (OJ L 169, 10.7.2000, p. 1). On 14 December 2019 this Directive will be replaced by Regulation (EU) 2016/2031 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 October 2016 on protective measures against pests of plants (OJ L 317, 23.11.2016
p. 4)
9
Section I, Part A of Annex IV to Directive 2000/29/EC.
3 frequencies of identity and physical checks can be applied as set out in Commission Regulation (EC) No 1756/2004.10 After 14 December 2019, those products shall be subject to the import controls of Articles 44 to 64 of Regulation (EU) 2017/625 on official controls11, which will replace the respective rules of Directive 2000/29/EC.
Private parties are advised that the specific conditions regarding the movement and importation of plants, plant products and other objects subject to the plant health provisions of Union law are regularly updated.  The respective website of the Commission (https://ec.europa.eu/food/plant/plant_health_biosecurity_en
provide
for general information concerning EU plant health legislation for imported plants, plant products or other objects. These pages will be updated with further information, where necessary.
European Commission Directorate-General for Health and Food Safety
10
Commission Regulation (EC) No 1756/2004 of 11 October 2004 specifying the detailed conditions for the evidence required and the criteria for the type and level of the reduction of the plant health checks of certain plants, plant products or other objects listed in Part B of Annex V to Council Directive 2000/29/EC, OJ L 313, 12.10.2004, p. 6. 11
Regulation (EU) 2017/625 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 March 2017 on official controls and other official activities performed to ensure the application of food and feed law, rules on animal health and welfare, plant health and plant protection products, OJ L 095 7.4.2017, p. 1

EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL FOR HEALTH  AND FOOD SAFETY
Brussels, Angers, 23 January 2018
OTICE TO STAKEHOLDER
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND EU RULES IN THE FIELD OF UNION PLANT VARIETY RIGHTS The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. This means that
unless a ratified withdrawal agreement
establishes another date, all Union primary and secondary law will cease to apply to the United Kingdom from 30 March 2019, 00:00h (CET) ('the withdrawal date').
The United Kingdom will then become a 'third country'
Preparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for EU and national authorities but also for private parties.  In view of the considerable uncertainties, in particular concerning the content of a possible withdrawal agreement
all breeders within the meaning of Article 11(1) of Regulation (EC) No 2100/94 on Community plant variety rights (hereinafter: the Basic Regulation) are reminded of legal repercussions, which need to be considered when the United Kingdom becomes a third country
Subject to any transitional arrangement that may be contained in a possible withdrawal agreement, as of the withdrawal date, the EU rules in the field of Plant Variety Rights no longer apply to the United Kingdom. This has
in particular
the following consequences
All Community Plant Variety Rights granted pursuant to the Basic Regulation will remain valid in the Union territory, regardless of the origin of the breeder or the location of the Examination Offices.  The Examination Offices in the United Kingdom will no longer have the possibility to participate in the technical verification of the maintenance of the protected varieties pursuant to Articles 64 and 65 of the Basic Regulation. Technical
Negotiations are ongoing with the United Kingdom with a view to reaching a withdrawal agreement.
2
Furthermore, in accordance with Article 50(3) of the Treaty on European Union, the European Council, in agreement with the United Kingdom, may unanimously decide that the Treaties cease to apply at a later date.
3
A third country is a country not member of the EU.
2 verifications following 30 March 2019 will be organised by the CPVO in an EU-27 based Examination Office.  According to Article 82 of the Basic Regulation, persons who are not domiciled or do not have a seat or an establishment within the EU territory may participate as party to proceedings before the Office only if they have designated a procedural representative who is domiciled or has his seat or an establishment within the EU territory. All interested breeders who are currently domiciled or have a seat in the United Kingdom only should consider the need to designate in a timely manner a procedural representative to comply with the provisions of that Article. Actions to be taken by the Community Plant Variety Office (CPVO) The Examination Offices in the United Kingdom are entrusted for 864 botanical taxa. Out of those
there are 678 botanical taxa for which no other Examination Office is entrusted in the Union. The CPVO has received applications regarding 324 of the aforesaid 678 botanical taxa. In order to ensure the continuity of the technical examination of varieties belonging to those botanical taxa, the CPVO has organised a procedure (the "new species procedure") to ensure as from 30 March 2019 at the latest the entrustment of Examination Offices in the Union to cover at least all 324 botanical taxa for which an actual application for a Community Plant Variety Right has been received by the CPVO. The procedure has progressed satisfactorily and six Examination Offices have been entrusted in the Union for 322 of the above species. However, taking into account the need for some Examination Offices to adapt to the new technical expectations, DUS tests for some species can only start in October 2018 or January 2019
All information on entrusted Examination Offices and species are available on the CP
web site
In order to avoid as much as possible transitional difficulties, CPVO will stop assigning the technical examination of varieties (Article 55(1) of the Basic Regulation) to the Examination Offices in the United Kingdom, where that examination is expected to last beyond 29 March 2019. The website of the Commission, Directorate General 'Health and Food Safety', on Plants provide
general information concerning Plant Variety Property Rights5. These pages will be updated with further information, where necessary.
DG for Health and Food Safety                                        Community Plant Variety Office

http://cpvo.europa.eu/en
https://ec.europa.eu/food/plant/plant_property_rights_en
EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL HEALTH AND FOOD SAFETY
Brussels, 23 January 2018
OTICE TO STAKEHOLDERS
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND EU RULES FOR AUTHORISATIONS AND CERTIFICATES FOR TRANSPORTERS OF LIVE ANIMALS
DRIVERS AND ATTENDANTS  The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. This means that unless a ratified withdrawal agreement
establishes another date, all Union primary and secondary law will cease to apply to the United Kingdom from 30 March 2019, 00:00h (CET) ('the withdrawal date').
The United Kingdom will then become a 'third country'.
Preparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for European and national authorities, but also for private parties. In view of the considerable uncertainties, in particular concerning the content of a possible withdrawal agreement, all business operators and persons holding transporters authorisations, certificates of approval of means of transport and certificates of competence for drivers and attendants pursuant to the provisions of Council Regulation (EC) No 1/2005 on the protection of animals during transport
(later called "the Regulation"), are reminded of certain legal repercussions which need to be considered when the United Kingdom becomes a third country. Subject to any transitional arrangement that may be contained in a possible withdrawal agreement, as of the withdrawal date, Council Regulation (EC) No 1/200
on the protection of animals during transport no longer applies to the United Kingdom. This has
in particular
the following consequences for the authorisations and certificates for transporters of live animals, drivers and attendants
Transporter authorisation
Transporter authorisation
granted by the competent authorities of the United Kingdom pursuant to Articles 10 or 11 of the Regulation will no longer be valid in the European Union from the moment the United Kingdom becomes a third country

Negotiations are ongoing with the United Kingdom with a view to reaching a withdrawal agreement.
Furthermore, in accordance with Article 50(3) of the Treaty on European Union, the European Council, in agreement with the United Kingdom, may unanimously decide that the Treaties cease to apply at a later date.
A third country is a country not member of the EU
4
OJ L 3, 5.1.2005, p. 1.
A transporter authorisation issued by the competent authority is required to transport live animals pursuant to Article 6(1) of the Regulation.
2 Transporters who hold such an authorisation and want to continue their professional activities in the European Union will have to apply for a new authorisation with an EU-27 Member State. Certificates of approval of means of transport  Certificates of approval
granted by the competent authorities of the United Kingdom pursuant to Articles 18 or 19 of the Regulation will no longer be valid in the European Union from the moment the United Kingdom becomes a third country
Transporters who want to continue their professional activities in the European Union will have to apply for the relevant certificate of approval with an EU-27 Member State. Certificates of competence for drivers and attendants  Certificates of competence
granted by the competent authorities of the United Kingdom pursuant to Article 17(2) of the Regulation will no longer be valid from the moment the United Kingdom becomes a third country
Persons who hold such a certificate of competence and want to continue their professional activities in the European Union will have to apply for a new certificate with an EU-27 Member State. Transporters are also invited to inform the persons concerned of the need to apply for a new certificate. The website of the Commission on animal welfare (https://ec.europa.eu/food/animals/welfare_en) provides general information concerning animal welfare. These pages will be updated with further information, where necessary
European Commission
irectorate
eneral Health and Food Safety


certificate of approval for means of transport issued by the competent authorities is required to transport animals by road over long journeys pursuant to Article 7(1) of the Regulation.  Certificates of approval are also required to transport certain animals by sea in livestock vessels (Domestic Equidae and domestic animals of bovine, ovine, caprine and porcine species) pursuant to Article 7(2) of the Regulation as well as to transport certain animals (Domestic Equidae and domestic animals of bovine, ovine, caprine and porcine species) in containers by road or water for long journeys pursuant to Article 7(3) of the Regulation.
A certificate of competence issued by the competent authorities (or a body designated by them) is required for persons who drive (or act as an attendant on) road vehicle transport certain animals (Domestic Equidae and domestic animals of bovine, ovine, caprine and porcine species and poultry) pursuant to Article 6 (5) of the Regulation.
EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL FOR HEALTH AND FOOD SAFE

Brussels, 23 January 2018
Rev1
NOTICE TO STAKEHOLDER
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND EU RULES IN THE FIELD OF SUBSTANCES OF HUMAN ORIGIN (BLOOD
TISSUES AND CELLS
AND ORGANS
The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. This means that
unless a ratified withdrawal agreement
establishes another date, all Union primary and secondary law will cease to apply to the United Kingdom from 30 March 2019, 00:00h (CET) ('the withdrawal date').
The United Kingdom will then become a 'third country'.
Preparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for EU and national authorities but also for private parties.  In view of the considerable uncertainties, in particular concerning the content of a possible withdrawal agreement, health establishments, stakeholders and organisations subject to the Union legislation on substances of human origin (blood, tissues and cells, and organs) are reminded of legal repercussions, which need to be considered when the United Kingdom becomes a third country
Subject to any transitional arrangement that may be contained in a possible withdrawal agreement, as of the withdrawal date, the EU rules in the field of substances of human origin (blood, tissues and cells, and organs) no longer apply to the United Kingdom. This has
in particular
the following consequences in the different areas
Blood and blood components: According to Article 21 (second subparagraph) of Directive 2002/98/EC
imports of blood and blood components from the United Kingdom will need to be tested in conformity with the Union testing requirements
Negotiations are ongoing with the United Kingdom with a view to reaching a withdrawal agreement.
Furthermore, in accordance with Article 50(3) of the Treaty on European Union, the European Council, in agreement with the United Kingdom, may unanimously decide that the Treaties cease to apply at a later date.
A third country is a country not member of the EU.

irective 2002/98/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 January 2003 setting standards of quality and safety for the collection, testing, processing, storage and distribution of human blood and blood components and amending Directive 2001/83/EC, OJ L 33, 8.2.2003, p. 30.
2 (Annex IV to that Directive). They will also need to meet equivalent standards of quality and safety (Annex V to Directive 2004/33/EC5).  Tissues and cells
Imports of tissues and cells from the United Kingdom will have to be undertaken by authorised importing tissue establishments located in the EU-27
Article 9(1) of Directive 2004/23/EC6) and meet standards of quality and safety equivalent to those laid down in the Union legislation (Article 9(1) of Directive 2004/23/EC and Directive (EU) 2015/566
. Directive 2004/23/EC also establishes, in Article 9(2), rules for export of tissues or cells to third countries. In particular, those Member States that export tissues or cells to third countries must ensure that the exports comply with the requirements of this Directive
Moreover, according to Article 9(3) of Directive 2004/23/EC, in some cases (where certain specific tissues and cells are distributed directly for immediate transplantation to the recipient or in case of emergency) the import or export of tissues and cells may be authorised directly by the competent authority, as long as such imports and exports meet quality and safety standards equivalent to those laid down in Directive 2004/23/EC and implementing legislation.  Organs
According to Article 20 of Directive 2010/53/EU8, exchange of organs with the United Kingdom will need to be supervised by a
EU-27 competent authority or European organ exchange organisations
where the Member State delegates the supervision to them
and meet quality and safety requirements equivalent to those laid down in the Union legislation.  In accordance with the aforementioned legislation, in all cases, blood, tissues and cells, and organs will need to be traceable from donor to recipient and vice versa.  The website of the Commission on blood, tissues and organs (https://ec.europa.eu/health/blood_tissues_organs/policy_en) provide for general information. These pages will be updated with further information, where necessary.
European Commission
irectorate
eneral for Health and Food Safety

Commission Directive 2004/33/EC of 22 March 2004 implementing Directive 2002/98/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council as regards certain technical requirements for blood and blood components, OJ L 91, 30.3.2004, p. 25.
Directive 2004/23/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 31 March 2004 on setting standards of quality and safety for the donation, procurement, testing, processing, preservation, storage and distribution of human tissues and cells, OJ L 102, 7.4.2004, p. 48
7
Commission Directive (EU) 2015/566 of 8 April 2015 implementing Directive 2004/23/EC as regards the procedures for verifying the equivalent standards of quality and safety of imported tissues and cells Text with EEA relevance, OJ L 93, 9.4.2015, p. 56
8
Directive 2010/53/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 7 July 2010 on standards of quality and safety of human organs intended for transplantation, OJ L 207, 6.8.2010, p. 14
EUROPEAN COMMISSION Directorate
eneral for Health and Food Safety
Brussels, 6 September 2018
OTICE TO STAKEHOLDERS
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND EU RULES IN THE FIELD OF CLINICAL TRIALS The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. This means that unless a ratified withdrawal agreement
establishes another date, all Union primary and secondary law will cease to apply to the United Kingdom from 30 March 2019, 00:00h (CET) ('the withdrawal date'). The United Kingdom will then become a 'third country'.
Preparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for EU and national authorities but also for private parties.  In view of the considerable uncertainties, in particular concerning the content of a possible withdrawal agreement, sponsors (both academic researchers and pharmaceutical companies) conducting or planning to conduct clinical trials, as well as investigators and other persons involved in the preparation and conduct of clinical trials in the EU are reminded of legal repercussions, which need to considered when the United Kingdom becomes a third country
Subject to any transitional arrangement that may be contained in a possible withdrawal agreement, as of the withdrawal date, the EU rules on clinical trials, and in particular Directive 2001/20/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 4 April 2001 on the approximation of the laws, regulations and administrative provisions of the Member States relating to the implementation of good clinical practice in the conduct of clinical trials on medicinal products for human use
no longer apply to the United Kingdom. This has
in particular
the following consequences:

Negotiations are ongoing with the United Kingdom with a view to reaching a withdrawal agreement.
A third country is a country not member of the EU
3
OJ L 121, 1.5.2001, p. 34.
Directive 2001/20/EC is going to be repealed by Regulation (EU) No 536/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 April 2014 on clinical trials on medicinal products for human use (OJ L 158, 27.5.2014, p. 1). However, in view of the timelines set in its Article 99, this Regulation is not going to apply before the withdrawal date.
1.
UPPLY OF INVESTIGATIONAL MEDICINAL PRODUCTS According to Article 13(1) of Directive 2001/20/EC, the import of investigational medicinal products into the EU is subject to the holding of an authorisation. This authorisation is also required if only part of the manufacturing (e.g. packaging or repacking, for example as part of blinding activities) is performed in the third country. Article 13(2) of Directive 2001/20/EC requires the holder of this authorisation to have permanently and continuously at his disposal the services of at least one qualified person located in the EU. The qualified person is responsible for ensuring that each production batch of an investigational medicinal product intended to be used in a clinical trial has been manufactured and checked in accordance with the standards of good manufacturing practices at least equivalent to those laid down in the EU and that each production batch has been checked in accordance the clinical trial authorisation (Article 13(3)(b) of Directive 2001/20/EC). Regarding comparator investigational medicinal product
which are authorised in a third country, the qualified person is responsible for ensuring, subject to exceptions, that each production batch has undergone all relevant analyses, tests or checks necessary to confirm its quality (Article 13(3)(c) of Directive 2001/20/EC). Retesting (analytical control) in the EU is not mandatory if already carried out in the third country (Article 11(2) second subparagraph of Commission Directive 2003/94/EC5).  As of the withdrawal date, these rules will apply to investigational medicinal products imported from the United Kingdom to the EU. 2.
STABLISHMENT REQUIREMENTS FOR THE SPONSOR OR THE LEGAL REPRESENTATIVE According to Article 19 of Directive 2001/20/EC, the sponsor of a clinical trial or a legal representative must be established in the EU. As of the withdrawal date, a sponsor established in the United Kingdom and conducting a clinical trial in the EU-27 has to ensure that a sponsor or a legal representative is established in the EU-27. The change of the sponsor or of the sponsor's legal representative is typically a substantial amendment
which requires notification to the competent authority/information of the Ethics Committee in accordance with the procedure set out in Article 10(a) of Directive 2001/20/EC.
3.
UBMISSION OF CLINICAL TRIAL INFORMATION Provisions of EU law relating to clinical trials
provide for the submission of certain clinical trial information to the EU clinical trials database EudraCT.
Commission Directive 2003/94/EC of 8 October 2003 laying down the principles and guidelines of good manufacturing practice in respect of medicinal products for human use and investigational medicinal products for human use
OJ L 262, 14.10.2003, p. 22
6
See point 123(a) of  the Communication from the Commission  Detailed guidance on the request to the competent authorities for authorisation of a clinical trial on a medicinal product for human use, the notification of substantial amendments and the declaration of the end of the trial (CT-1) (OJ, 30.3.2010, p. 1).
Cf. Articles 41 and 46 of Regulation (EC) No 1901/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 December 2006 on medicinal products for paediatric use (OJ L 378, 27.12.2006, p. 1),
Regarding protocol-related information, as of the withdrawal date, UK-specific trial information will no longer have to be submitted to EudraCT, except when the trial is part of an agreed Paediatric Investigation Plan and the United Kingdom is the only country in which the protocol has been submitted. Regarding result-related information, results of clinical trials conducted in the United Kingdom and completed before the withdrawal date must be submitted to EudraCT if the reporting of these results is due before the withdrawal date. Results of clinical trials conducted only in the United Kingdom and results of multi-country trials where the United Kingdom was the only EU/EEA Member state where the clinical trial was conducted have to be submitted to EudraCT, also after the withdrawal date, if this is required for non-EU/EEA studies (i.e. if the trial is part of an agreed Paediatric Investigation Plan or falls in the scope of Article 46 of Regulation (EC) No 1901/2006).
The websites of the Commission on clinical trials (https://ec.europa.eu/health/human-use/clinical-trials_en
provide general information. These pages will be updated with further information, where necessary.
European Commission
irectorate
eneral for Health and Food Safety                                                                                                                                                  Article 57 of Regulation (EC) No 726/2004 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 31 March 2004 laying down Community procedures for the authorisation and supervision of medicinal products for human and veterinary use and establishing a European Medicines Agency (OJ L 136, 30.4.2004, p. 1), and the implementation guidelines published in EudraLex, Volume 10 (https://ec.europa.eu/health/documents/eudralex/vol-10_en).
EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL FOR HEALTH AND FOOD SAFETY DIRECTORATE-GENERAL FOR AGRICULTURE AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT
Brussels, 20 March 2019 REV2  Replaces the notice REV1 published on 1 February 2018
OTICE TO STAKEHOLDER
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND EU FOOD LAW AND EU RULES ON QUALITY SCHEMES
The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. This means that as from 30 March 2019, 00:00h (CET)
the United Kingdom will be a third country
Preparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for EU and national authorities but also for private parties.  In view of the uncertainties
urrounding the ratification of the Withdrawal Agreement, all interested parties, and especially economic operators, are reminded of legal repercussions, which need to be considered when the United Kingdom becomes a third country
Subject to the transition period provided for in the draft Withdrawal Agreement,
as of the withdrawal date, EU food law
and EU rules on quality schemes no longer apply to the United Kingdom. This has in particular the following consequences:

Including protected designations of origin (PDO), protected geographical indications (PGI), geographical indication of spirit drinks and aromatised wines (GI) and traditional specialities guaranteed (TSG).

n accordance with Article 50(3) of the Treaty on European Union, the European Council, in agreement with the United Kingdom, may unanimously decide that the Treaties cease to apply at a later date.
A third country is a country not member of the EU.
Cf. Part four of the Agreement on the withdrawal of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland from the European Union and the European Atomic Energy Community (OJ, C 66 I, 19.2.2019, p. 1

See Article 3(1) of Regulation (EC) No 178/2002 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 28 January 2002 laying down the general principles and requirements of food law, establishing the European Food Safety Authority and laying down procedures in matters of food safety (OJ L 31,
2.2002, p. 1). This notice also addresses the EU rules on organic production. This notice does not address introduction into the Union of personal consignments of products of animal origin of a non commercial character which form part of travellers' luggage, or are sent as small consignments to private persons, or are ordered remotely (for example, by mail, by telephone or via the internet) and
2 1.
OOD LABELLING AND FOOD INFORMATION
HEALTH AND IDENTIFICATION MARKS EU food law harmonises the labelling of food placed on the EU market. The applicable rules are in particular contained in the following pieces of EU legislation
Regulation (EU) No 1169/2011 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 October 2011 on the provision of food information to consumers;
Regulation (EC) No 1924/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 20 December 2006 on nutrition and health claims made on foods;
Regulation (EU) No 609/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 June 2013 on food intended for infants and young children, food for special medical purposes, and total diet replacement for weight control
Regulation (EC) No 1829/2003 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 September 2003 on genetically modified food and feed,10 as well as Regulation (EC) No 1830/2003 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 September 2003 concerning the traceability and labelling of genetically modified organisms and the traceability of food and feed products produced from genetically modified organisms and amending Directive 2001/18/EC11
Regulation (EU) No 1308/2013 establishing a common organisation of the markets in agricultural products;12  Sectorial EU food legislation addressing food labelling and information, such as legislation on spirit drinks,13 honey,14 coffee extracts and chicory extracts,15                                                                                                                                                  delivered to the consumer (see Commission Regulation (EC) No 206/2009 of 5 March 2009 on the introduction into the Community of personal consignments of products of animal origin and amending Regulation (EC) No 136/2004, OJ L 77, 24.3.2009, p. 1). For the latter matter, please consult the otice on travelling between the EU and the United Kingdom following withdrawal of the United Kingdom from the EU
https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/file_import/travelling_en.pdf).
This notice is also relevant for food coming from the Channel Islands and Isle of Man (Regulation (EEC) No 706/73 of the Council of 12 March 1973 concerning the Community arrangements applicable to the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man for trade in agricultural products, OJ L 68, 15.3.1973. p. 1).
OJ L 304, 22.11.2011, p. 18.
OJ L 404, 30.12.2006, p. 9
9
OJ L 181, 29.6.2013, p. 35. 10
OJ L 268, 18.10.2003, p. 1. 11
OJ L 268, 18.10.2003, p. 24
12
OJ L 347, 20.12.2013, p. 671
13
Regulation (EC) No 110/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 January 2008 on the definition, description, presentation, labelling and the protection of geographical indications of spirit drinks, OJ L 39, 13.2.2008, p. 16
14
Council Directive 2001/110/EC of 20 December 2001 relating to honey
OJ L 10, 12.1.2002, p. 47

cocoa and chocolate products intended for human consumption,16 certain sugars,17 fruit and vegetables and processed fruit and vegetables,18 fruit juices,19 fruit jams, jellies and marmalades20 and certain milk products;21  Council Regulation (EC) No 834/2007 of 28 June 2007 on organic production and labelling of organic products.22
The EU food labelling rules apply to all food placed on the EU market, independently of the place of production of the food.  As of the withdrawal date, food placed on the EU-27 market23 will have to comply with these rules in accordance with Article 11 of Regulation (EC) No 178/2002
As a consequence, in some instances, EU food law may require some changes of the labelling of food placed on the EU-27 market as of the withdrawal date due to the fact that the United Kingdom will be a third country as of the withdrawal date. Examples include the following:
andatory presentation of the origin of a food product, where appropriate ;24  Mandatory labelling of the name or business name and address of the EU-27 importer of food from the United Kingdom;25                                                                                                                                                  15
Directive 1999/4/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 February 1999 relating to coffee extracts and chicory extracts, OJ L 66, 13.3.1999, p. 26
16
Directive 2000/36/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 June 2000 relating to cocoa and chocolate products intended for human consumption, OJ L 197, 3.8.2000, p. 19
17
Council Directive 2001/111/EC of 20 December 2001 relating to certain sugars intended for human consumption, OJ L 10, 12.1.2002, p. 53
18
Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) No 543/2011 of 7 June 2011 laying down detailed rules for the application of Council Regulation (EC) No 1234/2007 in respect of the fruit and vegetables and processed fruit and vegetables sectors, OJ L 157, 15.6.2011, p. 1
19
Council Directive 2001/112/EC of 20 December 2001 relating to fruit juices and certain similar products intended for human consumption, OJ L 10, 12.1.2002, p. 58
20
Council Directive 2001/113/EC of 20 December 2001 relating to fruit jams, jellies and marmalades and sweetened chestnut purée intended for human consumption, OJ L 10, 12.1.2002, p. 67
21
Council Directive 2001/114/EC of 20 December 2001 relating to certain partly or wholly dehydrated preserved milk for human consumption, OJ L 15, 17.1.2002, p. 19
22
OJ L 189, 20.7.2007, p. 1. 23
f sale, including offering for sale or any other form of transfer, whether free of charge or not, and the sale, distribution, and other forms of transfer themselves
24
See, for example, the labelling of "EU Agriculture" and "non-EU Agriculture" according to Article 24 of Council Regulation (EC) No 834/2007, or the labelling of honey as "blend of EU honeys" or "blend of non-EU honeys" (Article 2(4)(a) of Council Directive 2001/110/EC

4  Mandatory health or identification marks according to Article 5 of Regulation (EC) N
853/2004
As of the withdrawal
date the health mark26 or the identification mark27 shall no longer include the "EC" abbreviation,28 29which is reserved for establishments located in the EU, but shall include the name of the country (in full or with the ISO two-letter code) where the establishment is located and the approval number of this establishment.30 Food business operators are advised to assess the need for possible changes to the labelling of food placed on the EU-27 market as of the withdrawal date. Please note:
If an individual food product has been placed on the EU-27 market before the withdrawal date, i.e. it has been
held in the EU-27 for the purpose of sale, including offering for sale or any other form of transfer, whether free of charge or not; or
sold, distributed, of transferred by other forms to the EU-2731
his stock of food can continue to be sold, distributed or transferred in the EU-27 as of the withdrawal date without the need for labelling changes.32
This is to be assessed for each individual product. It does not extend, for example, to a type of product.
25
Articles 8(1) and 9(1)(h) of Regulation (EU) No 1169/2011 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 October 2011 on the provision of food information to consumers
OJ L 304, 22.11.2011, p. 18
26
Chapter III of Section I of Annex I to Regulation (EC) No 854/2004
27
Section I of Annex II to Regulation (EC) No 853/2004;. 28
Point 3(c) Chapter III of Section I of Annex I to Regulation (EC) No 854/2004. 29
Point 8 of Part B of Section I of Annex II to Regulation (EC) No 853/2004
30
It is possible for an animal-derived products to be marked (health or identification mark) in accordance with EU-law, and, in addition, in accordance with the requirements of a third country. However, EU law does not allow product to bear two markings under EU law, presenting the establishment as EU-based and third-country based.  31
holding of food or feed for the purpose of sale, including offering for sale or any other form of transfer, whether free of charge or not, and the sale, distribution, and other forms of transfer themselves. 32
For example, compliance as regards the EU origin of the product or the EU contact point of the producer
5 2.
OOD INGREDIENTS
FOOD COMPOSITION
CONTAMINANTS AND RESIDUE LIMITS
FOOD CONTACT MATERIA
According to substantive EU food law, certain food must not be placed on the market unless it has been approved by the Commission (for example for food additives33, food flavourings,34 smoke flavourings,35 vitamins and minerals used in food,36 including in food supplements37 and any novel food38) or an individual applicant has obtained an authorisation by the Commission (for example for genetically modified food39).
ertain food is subject to specific composition requirements40 and EU food law sets limits for contaminants41 42, and maximum residue levels of active substances.43
Food contact materials placed on the EU market are subject to EU rules44, and certain food contact materials are subject to additional specific measures.                                                   33
Regulation (EC) No 1333/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 December 2008 on food additives
OJ L 354, 31.12.2008, p. 16
34
Regulation (EC) No 1334/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 December 2008 on flavourings and certain food ingredients with flavouring properties for use in and on foods
OJ L 354, 31.12.2008, p. 34
35
Regulation (EC) No 2065/2003 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 10 November 2003 on smoke flavourings used or intended for use in or on foods
J L 309, 26.11.2003, p. 1
36
Regulation (EC) No 1925/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 20 December 2006 on the addition of vitamins and minerals and of certain other substances to foods, OJ L 404, 30.12.2006, p. 26. 37
Directive 2002/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 10 June 2002 on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to food supplements
OJ L 183, 12.7.2002, p. 51
38
Regulation (EU) 2015/2283 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 November 2015 on novel foods, amending Regulation (EU) No 1169/2011 of the European Parliament and of the Council (OJ L 327, 11.12.2015, p. 1). 39
Regulation (EC) No 1829/2003 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 September 2003 on genetically modified food and feed
OJ L 268, 18.10.2003, p. 1
40
Regulation (EU) No 609/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 June 2013 on food intended for infants and young children, food for special medical purposes, and total diet replacement for weight control (OJ L 181, 29.6.2013, p. 35). 41
Council Regulation (EEC) No 315/93 of 8 February 1993 laying down Community procedures for contaminants in food (OJ L 37, 13.2.1993, p. 1
42
Directive 2009/54/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 June 2009 on the exploitation and marketing of natural mineral waters (OJ L 164, 26.6.2009, p. 45). 43
Regulation (EC) No 396/2005 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 February 2005 on maximum residue levels of pesticides in or on food and feed of plant and animal origin
OJ L 70, 16.3.2005, p. 1); Regulation (EC) No 470/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 6 May 2009 laying down Community procedures for the establishment of residue limits of pharmacologically active substances in foodstuffs of animal origin (OJ L 152, 16.6.2009, p.11)

EU law on food ingredients and food composition, as well as EU law setting limits for contaminants and residues in food, applies to all food placed on the EU market, independently of the place of production of the food. The same applies for food contact material. 45 3.
EQUIREMENTS FOR FOOD BUSINESS OPERATORS AND AUTHORISATION HOLDERS
OR THEIR REPRESENTATIVES
TO BE ESTABLISHED IN THE EU
SUBMISSION OF EU AUTHORISATION REQUESTS THROUGH AN EU
EMBER STATE According to EU food law, in some instances the food business operators, authorisation holders, or their representatives have to be established in the EU.  Examples include the following:  Article 4(6) of Regulation (EC) No 1829/2003 on genetically modified food and feed, requires the applicant for an EU authorisation or his representative to be established in the EU;   Article 15(1)(c) of Regulation (EU) No 1935/2004 on materials and articles intended to come into contact with food, requires, as regards materials and articles which are not yet in contact with food, the manufacturer, processor, or seller responsible for placing on the market to be established in the EU.46 As of the withdrawal date, establishment in the United Kingdom no longer complies with these requirement
According to EU food law, in some instances EU authorisations require the submission of an authorisation dossier through the competent authority of an EU Member State. Examples include the following:  Article 9(1)(a) of Regulation (EC) No 1935/2004 on food contact materials requires applications for authorisations of substances to be made via a competent authority of a EU Member State.                                                                                                                                                   44
Regulation (EC) No 1935/2004 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 October 2004 on materials and articles intended to come into contact with food (OJ L 338, 13.11.2004, p. 4). 45
In addition, EU law sets for certain agricultural products originating in third countries maximum permitted levels of radio-caesium, which are checked upon importation into the EU, see Council Regulation (EC) No 733/2008 of 15 July 2008 on the conditions governing imports of agricultural products originating in third countries following the accident at the Chernobyl nuclear power station (OJ L 201, 30.7.2008, p.1); Commission Regulation (EC) No 1609/2000 of 24 July 2000 establishing a list of products excluded from the application of Council Regulation (EEC) No 737/90 on the conditions governing imports of agricultural products originating in third countries following the accident at the Chernobyl nuclear power station (OJ L 185, 25.7.2000, p.27) and Commission Regulation (EC) No 1635/2006 of 6 November 2006 laying down detailed rules for the application of Council Regulation (EEC) No 737/90 on the conditions governing imports of agricultural products originating in third countries following the accident at the Chernobyl nuclear power-station(OJ L 306, 7.11.2006, p.3)
46
The same or similar requirements are set out in sectorial food contact material legislation. See, as regards ceramic food contact material, Article 2a(1) of Council Directive 84/500/EEC of 15 October 1984 on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to ceramic articles intended to come into contact with foodstuffs, OJ L 277, 20.10.1984, p. 12

Article
of Regulation (EC) No 1829/2003 on genetically modified food and feed requires applications for authorisation to be sent to the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) through the competent authority of a Member State. As of the withdrawal date, applications through the competent authority of the United Kingdom are no longer possible. 4.
OOD PRODUCTION RULES/FOOD HYGIENE RULES
FOOD IRRADIATION
ORGANIC PRODUCTION
FOOD CONTACT MATERIALS EU food law sets rules for the production of food in the EU and in third countries, if this food is placed on the EU market. EU food law also provides for specific controls upon entry of food into the EU. 4.1. Food of animal origin47 As of the withdrawal date, the importation of food of animal origin from the United Kingdom into the EU-27 is prohibited, unless certain requirements are met, including
The United Kingdom is "listed" by the Commission for public48 and animal health49 purposes. For the "listing" of a third country, Article 6(1)(a) of Regulation (EC) No 853/200450
Article 1
of Regulation (EC) No 854/2004

and Article 8 of Council Directive 2002/99/EC apply.  The establishment in the United Kingdom from which the food is dispatched
and obtained or prepared in, is "listed" by the Commission for public health purposes
For the "listing" of establishments, Article 6(1)(b)(i) of Regulation (EC) No 853/2004 and Article 12 of Regulation (EC) No 854/2004 appl
The United Kingdom is "listed" by the Commission as a third country having a residue control plan approved in accordance with Directive 96/23/EC51 for the                                                  47
For "composite products" (i.e. foodstuff intended for human consumption that contains both processed products of animal origin and products of plant origin
Commission Decision 2007/275/EC of 17 April 2007 concerning lists of animals and products to be subject to controls at border inspection posts under Council Directives 91/496/EEC and 97/78/EC (OJ L 116, 4.5.2007, p. 9) and Commission Regulation (EU) No 28/2012 of 11 January 2012 laying down requirements for the certification for imports into and transit through the Union of certain composite products and amending Decision 2007/275/EC and Regulation (EC) No 1162/2009
OJ L 12, 14.1.2012, p. 1
set specific rules
48
Article 11 of Regulation (EC) No 854/2004 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 29 April 2004 laying down specific rules for the organisation of official controls on products of animal origin intended for human consumption
OJ L 139, 30.4.2004, p. 206). 49
Article 8 of Council Directive 2002/99/EC of 16 December 2002 laying down the animal health rules governing the production, processing, distribution and introduction of products of animal origin for human consumption (OJ L 18, 23.1.2003, p. 11). 50
Regulation (EC) No 853/2004 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 29 April 2004 laying down specific hygiene rules for food of animal origin (OJ L 139, 30.4.2004, p. 55). 51
Council Directive 96/23/EC of 29 April 1996 on measures to monitor certain substances and residues thereof in live animals and animal products (OJ L 125, 23.5.1996, p. 10).
8 animals and animal products specified therein. For the "listing" of a third country, Chapter VI of Directive 96/23/EC applies
The imported food satisfies all food hygiene requirements set out in Articles 4 to 6 of Regulation
(EC) No 852/200452 and Articles 3, 4,
, 7 and 8 of Regulation (EC) No 853/200453
The possibility for national measures to achieve EU food hygiene standards ("flexibility provisions") in accordance with Article 13(3
of Regulation (EC) No 852/2004, Article 10(3) of Regulation (EC) No 853/2004 and Article 17(5) of Regulation (EC) No 854/2004 no longer applies to the United Kingdom
Food business operators importing products of animal origin shall ensure that import takes place only if the above mentioned conditions are respected54
As of the withdrawal date, these substantial requirements are controlled upon entry into the EU-27 by applying mandatory border checks at the first point of entry into the Union territory:   This food can only enter the EU-27 through approved "border inspection posts"55
Each consignment undergoes documentary and identity checks
as well as at an appropriate frequency physical checks56
Each consignment has to be accompanied by a certificate in compliance with EU food legislation57 58
Regarding the transit of products of animal origin from an EU-27 Member State through a third country to another EU-27 Member State the following applies:  These products can only re-enter the EU-27 through an approved border inspection post
Each consignment undergoes a simple documentary check to verify that the products are actually from the EU-2759
52
Regulation (EC) No 852/2004 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 29 April 2004 on the hygiene of foodstuffs (OJ L 139, 30.4.2004, p. 1).  53
Regulation (EC) No 853/2004 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 29 April 2004 laying down specific hygiene rules for food of animal origin (OJ L 139, 30.4.2004, p. 55). 54
Paragraphs 1 to 4 of Article 6 of Regulation (EC) No 853/2004
55
Commission Decision 2009/821/EC of 28 September 2009 drawing up a list of approved border inspection posts, laying down certain rules on the inspections carried out by Commission veterinary experts and laying down the veterinary units in Traces
OJ L 296, 12.11.2009, p. 1). 56
Depending on the food in question, see Commission Decision 94/360/EC of 20 May 1994 on the reduced frequency of physical checks of consignments of certain products to be implemented from third countries
OJ L 158, 25.6.1994, p. 41
57
Article 14 of Regulation (EC) No 854/2004. 58
Article 9 of Council Directive 2002/99/EC of 16 December 2002 laying down the animal health rules governing the production, processing, distribution and introduction of products of animal origin for human consumption (OJ L 18, 23.1.2003, p. 11

These provisions apply regardless of the conditions which might be required by the United Kingdom to transit on its territory.
4.2. Food of non-animal origin Unlike for food of animal origin, the importation of food of non-animal origin is not subject to listing requirements of third countries and establishments.60
he EU Member States shall carry out regular official controls on imported food of non-animal origin
Those controls are organise
on the basis of the multi-annual national control plan and in the light of potential risks. The controls shall cover all aspects of the food legislation. In cases of known or emerging risk, EU rules providing an increased level of official controls at designated points of entry into the Union may apply.61 In addition, in order to ensure phytosanitary protection of the EU-27 Member States, the following phytosanitary EU rules apply
The import of tubers of species of Solanum L.
ware potatoes), and their hybrids is prohibited.62 For exceptions, Point 12 of Part A of Annex III to Council Directive 2000/29/EC applies
The import of certain fruits and vegetables is subject to specific requirements;63  The import of food listed in Annex V to Directive 2000/29/EC (some of them subject to the import requirements mentioned in the previous point) requires a phytosanitary certificate. These foods are subject to 100% documentary controls at the point of entry. They are also subject to identity and physical controls, though at specified minimum frequencies depending on the risk that they present.64                                                                                                                                                  59
Article 6(1) of Council Directive 89/662/EEC of 11 December 1989 concerning veterinary checks in intra-Community trade with a view to the completion of the internal market (OJ L 395, 30.12.1989, p.13) and Article 7(1) of Council Directive 90/425/EEC of 26 June 1990 concerning veterinary checks applicable in intra-Union trade in certain live animals and products with a view to the completion of the internal market (OJ L 224 18.8.1990, p. 29). 60
With the exception of sprouts, where a specific regime applies (see Regulation (EU) 210/2013 of 11 March 2013 on the approval of establishments producing sprouts pursuant to Regulation (EC) No 852/2004 of the European Parliament and of the Council, OJ L 68, 12.3.2013, p. 24
61
Commission Regulation (EC) No 669/2009 of 24 July 2009 implementing Regulation (EC) No 882/2004 of the European Parliament and of the Council as regards the increased level of official controls on imports of certain feed and food of non-animal origin and amending Decision 2006/504/EC (OJ L 194, 25.7.2009, p. 11). 62
Point 12 of Part A of Annex III to Council Directive 2000/29/EC of 8 May 2000 on protective measures against the introduction into the Community of organisms harmful to plants or plant products and against their spread within the Community (OJ L 169, 10.7.2000, p. 1). 63
Part A of Annex IV to Directive 2000/29/EC
64
Article 13a of Directive 2000/29/EC
10 4.3. Irradiated food
ood treated with ionising radiation is regulated by EU law.65 As of the withdrawal date, the import of irradiated food from the United Kingdom into the EU-27 is prohibited, unless the irradiation facilities in the United Kingdom are "listed" by the Commission. For the "listing" of a third country, Article
(
of Directive 1999/2/EC applies
4.4. Recycled plastic materials and articles intended to come into contact with food According to EU law, authorisation holders shall notify to the Commission manufacturing or recycling sites in third countries in which the recycling process of plastic materials and articles authorised pursuant to Regulation (EC) No 282/2008 takes place.66
4.5. Products bearing terms referring to the organic production method ertificates for organic production According to Regulation (EC) No 834/200767, only products satisfying the requirements of that Regulation can bear terms referring to the organic production method (e.g. organic, bio, eco, etc.) or the EU organic logo. According to Articles 29, 27(4) and 2(n) of Regulation (EC) No 834/2007, the control authorities and bodies of the EU Member States are responsible for issuing documentary evidence (certificates) to the operators necessary for placing such products on the EU market.   For a
organic product from an EU-27 Member State placed on the EU
7 market
s of the withdrawal date, the certificates issued by control authorities and bodies in accordance with Article 29 of Regulation (EC) No 834/2007 in the United Kingdom are no longer valid.  For an organic product from the United Kingdom imported to the EU-27 market as of the withdrawal date, the rules laid down in Title VI of Regulation (EC) No 834/2007 apply. This requires that the product to be imported to the EU as organic is accompanied by a certificate that has been issued by a body recognised in accordance with Article 32(2) (for import of compliant products) or Article 33(3) (for import of equivalent products) of Regulation (EC) No 834/2007.68 Without such a certificate, products from the United Kingdom cannot be imported into the EU-27 market as organic.                                                  65
Directive 1999/2/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 February 1999 on the approximation of the laws of the Member States concerning foods and food ingredients treated with ionising radiation (OJ L 66, 13
.1999, p. 16). 66
Article 10(3) of Commission Regulation (EC) No 282/2008 of 27 March 2008 on recycled plastic materials and articles intended to come into contact with foods (OJ L 86, 28.3.2008, p. 9). 67
Council Regulation (EC) No 834/2007 of 28 June 2007 on organic production and labelling of organic products and repealing Regulation (EEC) No 2092/91 (OJ L 189, 20.7.2007, p. 1)
68
A Regulation (EC) No 834/2007 is no longer possible (Article 8(1) of Commission Regulation (EC) No 1235/2008 of 8 December 2008
11 Please note: If an individual organic product has already been placed on the EU-27 market before the withdrawal date, i.e. it has been
held in the EU-27 for the purpose of sale, including offering for sale or any other form of transfer, whether free of charge or not; or
sold, distributed, of transferred by other forms to the EU-2769
his product
can continue to be sold, distributed or transferred in the EU-27 as of the withdrawal date under a certificate by control authorities and bodies in accordance with Article 29 of Regulation (EC) No 834/2007 in the United Kingdom. This is to be assessed for each individual product. It does not extend, for example, to a type of product.
Organic products from a third country other than the United Kingdom can continue to be placed on the EU-27 market as of the withdrawal date as organic on the basis of certificates issued by bodies currently recognised in accordance with Article 33(3) of Regulation (EC) No 834/2007 for the third country concerned, including when the recognised body is a UK based body.70 5. EU RULES ON QUALITY SCHEMES  EU quality schemes protect the names of specific products to promote their unique characteristics, linked to their geographical origin as well as traditional know-how. Product names can be granted with a 'geographical indication' (GI) if they have a specific link to the place where they are made. The applicable rules are in particular contained in the following pieces of EU legislation:  Regulation (EU) No 1151/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 21 November 2012 on quality schemes for agricultural products and foodstuffs71
in respect of Protected designations of origin, Protected geographical indications and Traditional specialities guaranteed);  Regulation (EU) No 1308/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 17 December 2013 establishing a common organisation of the                                                                                                                                                  laying down detailed rules for implementation of Council Regulation (EC) No 834/2007 as regards the arrangements for imports of organic products from third countries,  OJ L 334, 12.12.2008, p. 25). 69
See Article 2(j) of Regulation (EC) No 834/2007 and the definition in Article 3(8) of Regulation (EC) including offering for sale or any other form of transfer, whether free of charge or not, and the sale, distribution, and other forms of transfer themselves 70
This is currently only the case for one UK-based body, see Annex IV of Regulation (EC) No 1235/2008
71
OJ L 343, 14.12.2012, p. 1.
12 markets in agricultural products72
in respect of Protected designations of origin and Protected geographical indications);   Regulation (EC) No 110/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 January 2008 on the definition, description, presentation, labelling and the protection of geographical indications of spirit drinks73 and Regulation (EU) No 251/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 February 2014 on the definition, description, presentation, labelling and the protection of geographical indications of aromatised wine products74
in respect of Geographical indications).  As from the withdrawal date, EU legislation protecting the registered Protected designations of origin, Protected geographical indications, Geographical indications and Traditional specialities guaranteed will no longer have effect in the United Kingdom. Any right granted in accordance with the aforementioned Union law to protect Protected designations of origin, Protected geographical indications, Geographical indications and Traditional specialities guaranteed on or after the withdrawal date will only apply in the EU-27 Member States.  designations of origin, Protected geographical indications, Geographical indications and Traditional specialities guaranteed registered and protected in accordance with the aforementioned Union law might not be protected in the United Kingdom without interruption. As such, interested right holders should assess whether to seek alternative means of securing protection of the relevant geographical names in the United Kingdom, in accordance with United Kingdom law.
The website
of the Commission on food imports (https://ec.europa.eu/food/safety/official_controls/legislation/imports_en
organic farming (https://ec.europa.eu/agriculture/organic/index_en) and quality schemes (https://ec.europa.eu/info/food-farming-fisheries/food-safety-and-quality/certification/quality-labels_en) provide for general information concerning EU food legislation for imported food and organic farming. These pages will be updated with further information, where necessary.   European Commission
Directorate-General for Health and Food Safety
Directorate-General for Agriculture and Rural Development                                                  72
OJ L 347, 20.12.2013, p. 671. 73
OJ L 39, 13.2.2008, p. 16. 74
OJ L 84, 20.3.2014, p. 1

EUROPEAN COMMISSION Secretariat-General
Brussels, 13 April 2018
OTICE TO STAKEHOLDER
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND EU RULES IN THE FIELD OF THE EUROPEAN CITIZENS
INITIATIVE The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. This means that
unless a ratified withdrawal agreement
establishes another date, all Union primary and secondary law will cease to apply to the United Kingdom from 30 March 2019, 00:00h (CET) ('the withdrawal date').
The United Kingdom will then become a 'third country'.
Preparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for EU and national authorities but also for private parties.
he organisers of the ongoing citizens' initiatives as well as those intending to launch a citizens' initiative before the withdrawal date are reminded of legal repercussions, which need to be considered when the United Kingdom becomes a third country
The rules in the draft Withdrawal Agreement concerning transitional arrangements
agreed at negotiators' level between the EU and the UK and published on 19 March 2018
exclude the applicability in the United Kingdom of EU law on the European citizens' initiative during the transition period
(https://ec.europa.eu/commission/publications/draft-agreement-withdrawal-united-kingdom-great-britain-and-northern-ireland-european-union-and-european-atomic-energy-community-0_en
Thus, as of the withdrawal date, the EU rules on the European citizens' initiative, and in particular Article 11(4) of the Treaty on European Union and Regulation (EU) No 211/2011 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 February 2011 on the  ("ECI Regulation")
will no longer apply to the United Kingdom.    This will have
in particular
the following consequences for the organisation of the initiatives ongoing at the withdrawal date

Negotiations are ongoing with the United Kingdom with a view to reaching a withdrawal agreement.
Furthermore, in accordance with Article 50(3) of the Treaty on European Union, the European Council, in agreement with the United Kingdom, may unanimously decide that the Treaties cease to apply at a later date.
A third country is a country not member of the EU.
OJ L 65, 11.03.2011, p. 1.
2 1.
RGANISERS As of the withdrawal date, United Kingdom citizens can no longer be organisers of citizens' initiatives under the ECI Regulation which are ongoing on the withdrawal date or which have been launched on or after the withdrawal date
In case there are United Kingdom citizens or residents among the seven registered initiative organisers, they must be replaced by other individuals as of the withdrawal date so that the committee fulfils the conditions of Article 3(2) of the ECI Regulation.  2.
IGNATORIES As of the withdrawal date, statements of support submitted on the United Kingdom form will no longer be considered by the Commission unless they have been verified and certified under Article 8(1) of the EC
Regulation before the withdrawal date
This shall apply to both statements of support submitted by United Kingdom citizens residing in the United Kingdom, and by EU27 citizens residing in the United Kingdom
Statements of support submitted by the United Kingdom citizens residing in those Member States, which accept statements of support from their residents5, will only be considered if collected before the withdrawal date. Verification and certification under Article 8(1) of the ECI Regulation can take place before or after the withdrawal date. 3.
NLINE COLLECTION SYSTEMS As of the withdrawal date, any online collection system certified by the United Kingdom authorities in accordance with Article 6 of the ECI Regulation can no longer be used
A dedicated Commission website (ec.europa.eu/citizens-initiative) provides general information on the European Citizens' Initiative. This website will be updated with further information, where necessary.
European Commission Secretariat-General

Belgium, Denmark, Germany, Estonia, Ireland, Greece, Spain, Croatia, Italy, Cyprus, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxemburg, Hungary, Malta, the Netherlands, Poland, Romania, Slovenia, Slovakia, Finland and Sweden

EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL TAXATION AND CUSTOMS UNION DIRECTOR ATE-GENERAL FOR TRADE
Brussels, 30 January 2018
NOTICE TO STAKEHOLDER
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND EU RULES IN THE FIELD OF CUSTOMS AND INDIRECT TAXATION
The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. This means that
unless a ratified withdrawal agreement
establishes another date, all Union primary and secondary law will cease to apply to the United Kingdom from 30 March 2019, 00:00h (CET) ('the withdrawal date').
The United Kingdom will then become a 'third country'.
Preparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for EU and national authorities but also for private parties.
n view of the considerable uncertainties, in particular concerning the content of a possible withdrawal agreement, economic operators are reminded of legal repercussions, which need to be considered when the United Kingdom becomes a third country
Subject to any transitional arrangement that may be contained in a possible withdrawal agreement, as of the withdrawal date, the EU rules in the field of customs (see below, 1)
Negotiations are ongoing with the United Kingdom with a view to reaching a withdrawal agreement.
Furthermore, in accordance with Article 50(3) of the Treaty on European Union, the European Council, in agreement with the United Kingdom, may unanimously decide that the Treaties cease to apply at a later date.
A third country is a country not member of the EU.
For a movement of goods that has started before and ends on or after the withdrawal date, the EU undertakes to agree solutions with the United Kingdom in the withdrawal agreement on the basis of the EU's position on Customs related matters needed for an orderly withdrawal of the United Kingdom from the Union ( https://ec.europa.eu/commission/publications/position-paper-customs-related-matters-needed-orderly-withdrawal-uk-union_en
. Th
position paper also addresses administrative cooperation procedures on or after the withdrawal date between the EU-27 and the United Kingdom related to facts that have occurred prior to the withdrawal date (for example, mutual assistance related to the verification of proofs of origin).
2 and indirect taxation (VAT and excise duties  see below, 2
no longer apply to the United Kingdom.
This has in particular the following consequences as of the withdrawal date
1.
USTOMS
oods which are brought into the customs territory of the EU from the United Kingdom or are to be taken out of that territory for transport to the United Kingdom, are subject to customs supervision and may be subject to customs controls in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 952/2013 of 9 October 2013 laying down the Union Customs Code
This implies inter alia that customs formalities apply
declarations have to be lodged and customs authorities may require guarantees for potential or existing customs debts

oods which are brought into the customs territory of the EU from the United Kingdom are subject to Council Regulation (EEC) No 2658/87 of 23 July 1987 on the tariff and statistical nomenclature and on the Common Customs Tariff
This implies the application of the relevant customs duties.  Certain goods which enter the EU from the United Kingdom or are leaving the EU to the United Kingdom are subject to prohibitions or restrictions on grounds of public policy or public security, the protection of health and life of humans, animals or plants, or the protection of national treasures.

uthorisations granting the status of Authorised Economic Operator (AEO) and other authorisations for customs simplifications
issued by the customs authorities of the United Kingdom will no longer be valid in the customs territory of the Union.   Goods originating in the United Kingdom that are incorporated in goods exported from the EU to third countries will no longer qualify as "EU content" for the purpose of the EU's Common Commercial Policy. This affects the ability of EU exporters to cumulate with goods originating in the United Kingdom and may affect the applicability of preferential tariffs agreed by the Union with third countries.
This note does not address the general customs and tax free allowances applicable to goods in the personal luggage of travelers entering the EU.
The listing illustrates some important consequences in the field of customs and indirect taxation of the withdrawal of the United Kingdom from the Union but is not meant to be exhaustive.
OJ L 269, 10.10.2013, p. 1.
OJ L 256, 7.9.1987, p. 1
9
A list with such prohibitions and restrictions is published on the website of DG TAXUD and can be accessed here: https://ec.europa.eu/taxation_customs/sites/taxation/files/prohibition_restriction_list_customs_en.pdf

2.
NDIRECT TAXATION (VAT AND EXCISE DUTIES

oods which enter the VAT territory of the E
from the United Kingdom or are dispatched or transported from the VAT territory of the E
to the United Kingdom will respectively be treated as importation or exportation of goods in accordance with Council Directive 2006/112/EC of 28 November 2006 on the common system of value added tax (the 'VAT Directive').10 This implies charging VAT at importation, while exports are exempt from VAT
Taxable persons wishing to use one of the special schemes of Chapter 6 of Title XII of the VAT Directive (the so-called Mini One-Stop Shop or MOSS)
who supply telecommunications services, broadcasting services or electronic services to non-taxable persons in the EU
will have to
registered for the MOSS in a Member State of the EU.
axable persons established in the United Kingdom purchasing goods and services or importing goods subject to VAT in a Member State of the EU who wish to claim a refund of that VAT may no longer file electronically in accordance with Council Directive 2008/9/EC11 but have to claim in accordance with Council Directive 86/560/EEC12. Member States may make refunds under the latter Directive subject to reciprocity.  A company established in the United Kingdom carrying out taxable transactions in a Member State of the EU may be required by that Member State to designate a tax representative as the person liable for payment of the VAT in accordance with the VAT Directive
The movement of goods which enter the excise territory of the E
from the United Kingdom or are dispatched or transported from the excise territory of the EU to the United Kingdom will respectively be treated as importation or exportation of excise goods in accordance with Council Directive 2008/118/EC of 16 December 2008 concerning the general arrangements for excise duty13
This implies, inter alia, that the Excise Movement and Control System (EMCS) on its own will no longer be applicable to excise duty suspended movements of excise goods from the EU into the United Kingdom, but those movements will be treated as exports, where excise supervision ends at the place of exit from the EU. Movements of excise goods to the United Kingdom will therefore require an export declaration as well as an electronic administrative document (e-AD). Movements of excise goods from the United Kingdom to the EU will have to be released from customs formalities before a movement under EMCS can begin.                                                  10
OJ L 347, 11.12.2006, p. 1
11 Council Directive 2008/9/EC of 12 February 2008 laying down detailed rules for the refund of value added tax, provided for in Directive 2006/112/EC, to taxable persons not established in the Member State of refund but established in another Member State (OJ L 44, 20.2.2008, p. 23). 12 Thirteenth Council Directive 86/560/EEC of 17 November 1986 on the harmonisation of the laws of the Member States relating to turnover taxes  Arrangements for the refund of value added tax to taxable persons not established in Community territory (OJ L 326, 21.11.1986, p. 40). 13
OJ L 9, 14.1.2009, p. 12

The website
of the Commission on taxation and customs union (https://ec.europa.eu/taxation_customs/index_en) and external trade (http://ec.europa.eu/trade/import-and-export-rules/) provide
for general information on the rules as they apply currently to the importation and exportation of goods. The relevant pages will be updated with further information, whenever available.
European Commission
irectorate
eneral Taxation and Customs Union Director ate-General for Trade
EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL TAXATION AND CUSTOMS UNION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL ENVIRONMENT DIRECTORATE-GENERAL INTERNAL MARKET, INDUSTRY, ENTREPRENEURSHIP, SMEs DIRECTORATE-GENERAL TRADE DIRECTORATE-GENERAL CLIMATE ACTION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL MIGRATION AND HOME AFFAIRS DIRECTORATE-GENERAL HEALTH AND FOOD SAFETY SERVICE FOR FOREIGN POLICY INSTRUMENTS
Brussels, 25 January 2018
OTICE TO STAKEHOLDER
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND EU RULES IN THE FIELD OF IMPORT/EXPORT LICENCES FOR CERTAIN GOODS The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. This means that unless a ratified withdrawal agreement
establishes another date, all Union primary and secondary law will cease to apply to the United Kingdom from 30 March 2019, 00:00h (CET) ('the withdrawal date').
The United Kingdom will then become a 'third country'.
Preparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for EU and national authorities but also for private parties
In view of the considerable uncertainties, in particular concerning the content of a possible withdrawal agreement, stakeholders engaged in shipments of goods which are subject to import/export licences or which may become subject to import/export licences as of the withdrawal date are reminded of legal repercussions, which need to be considered when the United Kingdom itself becomes a third country

Subject to any transitional arrangement that may be contained in a possible withdrawal agreement, as of the withdrawal date, for shipments of goods to/from third countries, including the United Kingdom, the following applies with regard to import/export licences

Negotiations are ongoing with the United Kingdom with a view to reaching a withdrawal agreement.
Furthermore, in accordance with Article 50(3) of the Treaty on European Union, the European Council, in agreement with the United Kingdom, may unanimously decide that the Treaties cease to apply at a later date.
A third country is a country not member of the EU
4
For a movement of goods that has started before and ends on or after the withdrawal date, ("sailing goods"), the EU is trying to agree solutions with the United Kingdom in the withdrawal agreement. The essential principles of the EU's position on Customs related matters needed for an orderly withdrawal of the UK from the Union are available here: https://ec.europa.eu/commission/publications/position-paper-customs-related-matters-needed-orderly-withdrawal-uk-union_en
5
This notice does not address rules based on the EURATOM Treaty.
1.
MPORT/EXPORT LICENCES REQUIRED UNDER UNION LAW Different areas of Union law provide, for certain goods, a mandatory authorisation/approval/notification of shipments from a third country to the European Union or vice versa (hereafter "import/export licences"). In most cases, such licence is not required for intra-Union shipments, or the requirements differ. Usually, import/export licences are issued by national competent authorities, and compliance is controlled as part of customs controls in the European Union
As of the withdrawal date, where the import/export of goods is subject to a licensing requirement under Union law, shipments from the EU-27 to the United Kingdom and vice versa will require such an import/export licence.
2.
MPORT/EXPORT LICENCES ISSUED BY THE UNITED KINGDOM AS AN EU
EMBER STATE ON THE BASIS OF
NION LAW Union law may provide for the possibility of import/export licences to be issued by a Member State other than the Member State where the good enters or exits the European Union.  As of the withdrawal date, import/export licences issued by the United Kingdom as an EU Member State on the basis of Union law are no long valid for shipments to the EU-27 from third countries or vice versa
3.
OODS CONCERNED Import/export licences exist in a wide range of policy areas and for a wide variety of goods, including the following:  Waste
(Regulation (EC) No 1013/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 14 June 2006 on shipments of waste7);
Certain hazardous chemicals
(Regulation (EU) No 649/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 4 July 2012 concerning the export and import of hazardous chemicals9);
Ozone-depleting substances10 (Regulation (EC) No 1005/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 September 2009 on substances that deplete the ozone layer11);

For more information, please refer to the thematic website: http://ec.europa.eu/environment/waste/shipments/index.htm
7
OJ L 190, 12.7.2006, p. 1.
For more information, please refer to the thematic website: http://ec.europa.eu/environment/chemicals/trade_dangerous/index_en.htm
9
OJ L 201, 27.7.2012, p. 60. 10
For more information, please refer to the thematic website: https://ec.europa.eu/clima/policies/ozone/ods_en
3  Mercury and certain mixtures of mercury12
Regulation (EU) No 2017/852 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 17 May 2017 on mercury13
Drug precursors14 (Council Regulation (EC) No 111/2005 of 22 December 2004 laying down rules for the monitoring of trade between the Community and third countries in drug precursors15);   Genetically-modified organisms16 (Regulation (EC) No 1946/2003 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 July 2003 on transboundary movements of genetically modified organisms17);
Specimens of endangered species18 (Council Regulation (EC) No 338/97 of 9 December 1996 on the protection of species of wild fauna and flora by regulating trade therein19);   Cultural goods20 (Council Regulation (EC) No 116/2009 of 18 December 2008 on the export of cultural goods21);   Rough diamonds22 (Council Regulation (EC) No 2368/2002 of 20 December 2002 implementing the Kimberley Process certification scheme for the international trade in rough diamonds23);
"Dual use goods"24 (Council Regulation (EC) No 428/2009 of 5 May 2009 setting up a Community regime for the control of exports, transfer, brokering and transit of dual-use items25
11
OJ L 286, 31.10.2009, p. 1. 12
For more information, please refer to the thematic website: http://ec.europa.eu/environment/chemicals/mercury/regulation_en.htm.  13
OJ L 137, 24.5.2017, p. 1
14
For more information, please refer to the thematic website: https://ec.europa.eu/taxation_customs/business/customs-controls/drug-precursors-control_en
15
OJ L 22, 26.1.2005, p. 1. 16
For more information, please refer to the thematic website: https://ec.europa.eu/food/plant/gmo/transboundary_en. 17
OJ L 287, 5.11.2003, p. 1. 18
For more information, please refer to the thematic website: http://ec.europa.eu/environment/cites/index_en.htm
19
OJ L 61, 3.3.1997, p. 1. 20
For more information, please refer to the thematic website: https://ec.europa.eu/taxation_customs/business/customs-controls/cultural-goods_en
21
OJ L 39, 10.2.2009, p. 1. 22
For more information, please refer to the thematic website:
ttp://ec.europa.eu/dgs/fpi/what-we-do/kimberley_process_en.htm
23
OJ L 358, 31.12.2002, p. 28
4  Firearms and ammunition26 (Regulation (EU) No 258/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 14 March 2012 implementing Article 10 of the firearms, their parts and components and ammunition, supplementing the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organised Crime (UN Firearms Protocol), and establishing export authorisation, and import and transit measures for firearms, their parts and components and ammunition27
Military technology and equipment28 (Council Common Position 2008/944/CFSP of 8 December 2008 defining common rules governing control of exports of military technology and equipment29
Certain goods which could be used for capital punishments/torture30
Council Regulation (EC) No 1236/2005 of 27 June 2005 concerning trade in certain goods which could be used for capital punishment, torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment31).
Stakeholders concerned may want to consider taking the necessary steps in order to prepare for possible changes
The aforementioned website
of the Commission Services provide for general information concerning import/export licences. These pages will be updated with further information, where necessary. European Commission
Directorate-General Taxation and Customs Union Directorate-General Environment Directorate-General Internal Market, Industry, Entrepreneurship and SMEs Directorate-General Trade Directorate-General Climate Action Directorate-General Migration and Home Affairs Directorate-General Health and Food Safety Service for Foreign Policy Instruments                                                                                                                                                   24
For more information, please refer to the thematic website: http://ec.europa.eu/trade/import-and-export-rules/export-from-eu/dual-use-controls/
25
OJ L 134, 29.5.2009, p. 1
26
For more information, please refer to the thematic website: https://ec.europa.eu/home-affairs/what-we-do/policies/organized-crime-and-human-trafficking/trafficking-in-firearms_en
27
OJ L 94, 30.3.2012, p. 1
28
technology and equipment lists, but shall not directly replace them. The latest version of the EU Common Military List was published in OJ C 97, 28.3.2017, p. 1. 29
OJ L 335, 13.12.2008, p. 99. 30
For more information, please refer to the thematic website: http://ec.europa.eu/dgs/fpi/what-we-do/anti-torture_measures_en.htm
31
OJ L 200, 30.7.2005, p. 1
EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL TAXATION AND CUSTOMS UNION Brussels, 4 June 2018 Rev1
OTICE TO STAKEHOLDERS
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND EU RULES IN THE FIELD OF CUSTOMS ENFORCEMENT OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. This means that, unless a ratified withdrawal agreement
establishes another date, all Union primary and secondary law will cease to apply to the United Kingdom from 30 March 2019, 00:00h (CET) ('the withdrawal date').
The United Kingdom will then become a 'third country'
Preparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for EU and national authorities but also for private parties. In view of the considerable uncertainties, in particular concerning the content of a possible withdrawal agreement, intellectual property right owners are reminded of legal repercussions, which need to be considered when the United Kingdom becomes a third country. Subject to any transitional arrangements that may be contained in a possible withdrawal agreement, as of the withdrawal date, the EU rules on customs enforcement of intellectual property rights, and in particular Regulation (EU) No 608/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 June 2013 concerning customs enforcement of intellectual property rights,
no longer appl
to the United Kingdom.  This has in particular the following consequences
According to Section 1 of Chapter II of Regulation (EU) No 608/2013, an applicant can submit to the competent customs department a Union application requesting the customs authorities of that Member State and of one or more other Member States to take action with respect to goods suspected of infringing an intellectual property right
In the case of
Negotiations are ongoing with the United Kingdom with a view to reach a withdrawal agreement.
Furthermore, in accordance with Article 50(3) of the Treaty on European Union, the European Council, in agreement with the United Kingdom, may unanimously decide that the Treaties cease to apply at a later date.
A third country is a country not member of the EU.
OJ L 181, 29.6.2013, p. 15.
a Union application, where the application is granted by the competent customs department in accordance with Articles 7 to 9 of Regulation (EU) No 608/2013, this decision takes effect in all Member States where action by the customs authorities are requested
Article 10(2)(b) of Regulation (EU) No 608/2013
Submission of Union applications: As of the withdrawal date, Union applications can no longer be submitted to the competent customs department of the United Kingdom. Union applications submitted in one of the EU-27 Member States remain valid in the EU-27 as of the withdrawal date even if the customs authorities of the United Kingdom are amongst the customs authorities requested to take action. Where a Union application was submitted in a Member State other than the United Kingdom, only requesting the customs authorities of that Member States and the customs authorities of the United Kingdom to take action, that application remain
valid as a national application for the Member State in which it was submitted
Decisions concerning granted Union applications: As of the withdrawal date
decisions granting Union applications adopted by the competent customs department of the United Kingdom as a Member State on the basis of Union law are no longer valid in the EU-27.  Decisions granting Union applications adopted in one of the EU-27 Member State
remain valid in the EU-27 as of the withdrawal date even if the customs authorities of the United Kingdom are amongst the customs authorities required to take action
Where a Member State other than the United Kingdom adopted a decision granting a Union application
requiring only the customs authorities of that Member State and the customs authorities of the United Kingdom to take action
that decision remain
valid for the Member State in which it was adopted
The website of the Commission on taxation and customs union
https://ec.europa.eu/taxation_customs/business/customs-controls/counterfeit-piracy-other-ipr-violations/defend-your-rights_en) provides for general information on the rules on customs enforcement of intellectual property rights. These pages will be updated with further information, where necessary.
European Commission  Directorate-General Taxation and Customs Union
EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL TAXATION AND CUSTOMS UNION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL FOR TRADE Brussels, 4 June 2018
OTICE TO STAKEHOLDER
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND EU RULES IN THE FIELD O
CUSTOMS AND EXTERNAL TRADE
PREFERENTIAL ORIGIN OF GOODS The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. This means that, unless a ratified withdrawal agreement
establishes another date, all Union primary and secondary law will cease to apply to the United Kingdom from 30 March 2019, 00:00h (CET) ('the withdrawal date').
The United Kingdom will then become a 'third country'.
Preparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for EU and national authorities but also for economic operators
Economic operators are reminded
of the legal repercussions concerning rules of origin for preferential treatment of goods
which need to be considered when the United Kingdom becomes a third country.
In particular, as of the withdrawal date, the EU preferential trade arrangements with third countries in the field of the common commercial policy and customs no longer apply to the United Kingdom

Negotiations are ongoing with the United Kingdom with a view to reaching a withdrawal agreement.
Furthermore, in accordance with Article 50(3) of the Treaty on European Union, the European Council, in agreement with the United Kingdom, may unanimously decide that the Treaties cease to apply at a later date.
A third country is a country not member of the EU.
This notice complements the information on rules of origin in the "Notice to stakeholders  withdrawal of the United Kingdom and EU rules in the field of customs and indirect taxation" of 30 January 2018 (https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness_en).
For certain movement
of goods that have started before and end on or after the withdrawal date, the EU aims at agreeing solutions with the United Kingdom in the withdrawal agreement on the basis of the EU's position on Customs related matters needed for an orderly withdrawal of the United Kingdom from the Union (https://ec.europa.eu/commission/publications/position-paper-customs-related-matters-needed-orderly-withdrawal-uk-union_en). The position paper also addresses administrative cooperation procedures on or after the withdrawal date between the EU-27 and the United Kingdom related to facts that have occurred prior to the withdrawal date (for example, mutual assistance related to the verification of proofs of origin). These arrangements will, however, only apply if a withdrawal agreement is signed and ratified by the EU and the UK before the withdrawal date.
2 1.
ACKGROUND ON PREFERENTIAL ORIGIN As part of the EU common commercial policy, the EU has preferential trade arrangements with third countries, such as Free Trade Agreements (FTAs) and the Generalised Scheme of Preferences
(GSP).
Goods exported from the EU may benefit from preferential tariff treatment in an EU FTA partner country when they have EU preferential origin, i.e. they are either from materials which are subject to working or processing fulfilling certain
oods imported into the EU from third countries with which the EU has preferential trade arrangements receive preferential tariff treatment if they comply with preferential rules of origin
For the purpose of determining the preferential origin of goods manufactured in a third countr
with which the EU has a preferential trade arrangement, EU originating inputs (materials and, in some arrangements, processing operations) incorporated in those goods are deemed to be originating in that third country (cumulation of origin). The rules and procedures for the determination of a preferential origin are contained in the respective preferential trade arrangements and may vary depending on these arrangements
For
h
determination of preferential origin, the EU is considered as a single territory, no distinction being made between Member State
Therefore, United Kingdom inputs (materials or processing operations) currently account as EU  for the determination of the EU preferential origin of goods
The origin of the goods is certified commercial documents. The origin of goods may be subject to verification by the exporting party, upon request from the importing party. To provide evidence of compliance with origin requirements, the exporter obtains
In case an agreement is reached on transitional arrangements in a possible withdrawal agreement, the Union will notify the other parties to the international agreements (including agreements that provide for preferential tariff treatment) concluded by the Union, or by Member States on its behalf or by the Union and its Member States acting jointly that
during the transition period, the United Kingdom is to be treated as a Member State for the purposes of these agreements.
http://ec.europa.eu/trade/policy/countries-and-regions/development/generalised-scheme-of-preferences/index_en.htm

With regard to the issues set out in this notice (effect of United Kingdom input when determining the preferential origin for tariff treatment)
the preferential tariff treatments in the Generalised Scheme of Preferences may be in practice less relevant than Free Trade Agreements. However, for the sake of completeness, both aspects are addressed in this notice.
A list of all EU preferential arrangements with third countries is available here: https://ec.europa.eu/taxation_customs/business/calculation-customs-duties/rules-origin/general-aspects-preferential-origin/arrangements-list_en

allow for the traceability within the EU of the production processes and supplies of materials until the export of the final product.10 2.
ONSEQUENCES OF THE WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM As of the withdrawal date
the United Kingdom becomes a third country to which the EU preferential trade arrangements with third countries cease to apply. United Kingdom inputs (materials or processing operations) are considered a- for the determination of the preferential origin of goods incorporating those inputs. This means the following:  Goods exported from the EU
As of the withdrawal date, a
EU FTA partner country may consider that goods having an EU preferential origin before the withdrawal date no longer qualif
at the moment of their importation in that third country
due to United Kingdom inputs
As of the withdrawal date, in case of verification of the origin of goods exported to a third country under preferential treatment, the exporters in the EU-27 may, upon request from that third country, have to prove the EU origin of the goods taking into account that United Kingdom input  Goods imported into the EU
United Kingdom inputs incorporated in goods obtained in third countries with which the EU has preferential trade arrangements and imported into the EU as of the withdrawal date will be
, in particular in a context of cumulation of origin with the EU
As of the withdrawal date, in case of verification of the origin of goods imported into the EU, exporters in third countries may have to prove the EU preferential origin of the imported goods
3.
DVICE TO STAKEHOLDER
Goods exported from the EU
To address the abovementioned consequences
EU-27 exporters and producers
intending to claim preferential tariff treatment in an EU FTA partner country as from the withdrawal date
are advised to
treat any United Kingdom inputs as non-originating whe
determining the EU preferential origin of their goods; and  take appropriate steps to be able to prove the EU preferential origin of their goods, in case of subsequent verification, without taking account of any United Kingdom inputs a
EU content
10
To this end, EU exporters and producers use dedicated accounting systems, records and supporting documents, in their possession in the EU.
4  Goods imported into the EU
EU-27 importers are advised to ensure that the exporter is able to prove the EU preferential origin of the imported goods, taking account of the consequences of the withdrawal of the United Kingdom
The websites of the Commission on taxation and customs union (https://ec.europa.eu/taxation_customs/business/calculation-customs-duties/rules-origin/general-aspects-preferential-origin_en) and external trade (Market Access Database)
http://madb.europa.eu/madb/rulesoforigin_preferential.htm) provide more information on the preferential origin of goods. The relevant pages will be updated with further information, whenever available. European Commission Directorate-General Taxation and Customs Union Directorate-General for Trade
EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL TAXATION AND CUSTOMS UNION
Brussels, 27 March 201
REV1
Replaces the Notice to stakeholders published on 11 September 2018
OTICE TO STAKEHOLDER
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND EU RULES  IN THE FIELD OF
ALUE ADDED TAX The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. On 22 March 2019, the European Council (Article 50) decided, in agreement with the United Kingdom, and in the event that the Withdrawal Agreement is approved by the House of Commons by 29 March, to extend the 2-years period provided for in Article 50(3) of the Treaty on European Union until 22 May 2019.  In the event that the Withdrawal Agreement is not approved by the House of Commons by 29 March 2019, the European Council decided to extend the period provided for in Article 50(3) of the Treaty on European Union until 12 April 2019. This means that as from 13 April 2019, 00:00h
Preparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for EU and national authorities but also for private parties.  In view of the uncertainties surrounding the ratification of the Withdrawal Agreement, all interested parties, and especially economic operators, are reminded of legal repercussions in the field of value added tax (VAT), which need to be considered when the United Kingdom becomes a third country. Subject to the transition period provided for in the draft Withdrawal Agreement,
as of the withdrawal date, the EU rules in the field of VAT, and in particular Council Directive 2006/112/EC of 28 November 2006 on the common system of value added tax
(hereafter the 'VAT Directive') and Council Directive 2008/9/EC of 12 February 2008 laying down detailed rules for the refund of value added tax, provided for in Directive
A third country is a country not member of the EU.
Cf. Part Four of the Agreement on the Withdrawal of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland from the European Union and the European Atomic Energy Community (OJ, C 66 I, 19.2.2019, p. 1

OJ L 347, 11.12.2006, p. 1

2006/112/EC, to taxable persons not established in the Member State of refund but established in another Member State
no longer apply to the United Kingdom. This has in particular the following consequences concerning the treatment of taxable transactions (see below, 1) and VAT refunds (see below, 2)
1. VAT PAYMENTS AND LIABILITY 1.1. Treatment of supplies of goods between the EU and the United Kingdom 1.1.1. EU rules for VAT payments/returns for cross-border supplies of goods EU VAT legislation provides for different regimes of VAT payments/returns for cross-border supplies/acquisitions and movements to/from Member States and third countries.  As of the withdrawal date, the EU rules for cross-border supplies and movements between EU Member States will no longer apply in the relations between EU-27 Member States and the United Kingdom (e.g. no intra-Community supplies and acquisitions
no distance sales regime for goods to and from the United Kingdom).
Instead, as of the withdrawal date, supplies and movements of goods between the EU and the United Kingdom are subject to the VAT rules on imports and exports. This implies that goods which are brought into the VAT territory of the EU from the United Kingdom or are to be taken out of that territory for transport to the United Kingdom, will be subject to customs supervision and may be subject to customs controls in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 952/2013 of 9 October 2013 laying down the Union Customs Code.
VAT will be due at the importation in the EU7, at the rate that applies to the supplies of the same goods within the EU.
VAT will be payabl
to customs authorities at the time of importation, unless the Member State of importation allows to enter import VAT in the periodical VAT return of the taxable person
The taxable amount is based on the value for customs purposes, but increased by (a) taxes, duties, levies and other charges due outside the Member State of
OJ L 44, 20.2.2008, p. 23
5
This notice complements the "Notice to stakeholders  withdrawal of the United Kingdom and EU rules in the field of customs and indirect taxation", published on 30 January 2018
6
OJ L 269, 10.10.2013, p. 1.
Article 2(1)(d) of the VAT Directive.
Article 94(2) of the VAT Directive.
Article 211 of the VAT Directive.
3 importation, and those due by reason of importation
excluding the VAT to be levied, and (b) incidental expenses, such as commission, packing, transport and insurance costs, incurred up to the first place of destination within the territory of the Member State of importation as well as those resulting from transport to another place of destination within the EU, if that other place is known when the chargeable event occurs.10  The customs export procedure will be obligatory for Union goods leaving the EU customs territory. First the exporter will present the goods and a pre-departure declaration (customs declaration, re-export declaration, exit summary declaration) at the customs office responsible for the place where he is established or where the goods are packed or loaded for export shipment (customs office of export). Subsequently, the goods will be presented at the customs office of exit which may examine the goods presented based on the information received from the customs office of export and will supervise their physical exit out of the EU customs territory.  Goods will be exempt from VAT if they are dispatched or transported to a destination outside the EU.11 The supplier of exported goods must be able to prove that the goods have left the EU. In this regard, Member States generally base themselves on the certification of exit given to the exporter by the customs office of export
1.1.2. On-going movements of goods from the United Kingdom to the EU-27 Member States at the moment of its withdrawal There may be situations where goods are dispatched or transported from the United Kingdom before the withdrawal date, but where these  or after the withdrawal date. An intra-Community acquisition of goods is regarded as being made when the corresponding supply is effected. In certain cases,
uch a supply may have been effected before the withdrawal date, at the time when dispatch or transport of these goods began
or during dispatch or transport of the goods
even if the goods arrive after withdrawal. An intra-Community acquisition of goods of which the dispatch or transport from the United Kingdom to the EU-27 Member States started before its withdrawal from the EU is disregarded if the importation of these goods, as provided for in Article 30 of the VAT                                                  10
Articles 85 and 86 of the VAT Directive. 11
Article 146 of the VAT Directive.
4
irective, in a Member State of the EU-27 take
place as from the withdrawal date.12 This approach respect
the principle of neutrality of VAT, provide
legal certainty and ensure
a rational taxation that avoids double taxation. 1.1.3. Re-importation of goods after the withdrawal of the United Kingdom Article 143(1)(e) of the VAT Directive provides for an exemption from VAT of the reimportation, by the person who exported them, of goods in the state in which they were exported, where those goods are exempt from customs duties.  There may be situations where goods that were transported or dispatched from an EU-27 Member State to the United Kingdom before the withdrawal date, are returned
in the same state, to the EU-27 on or after the withdrawal date.
he notion of "re-importation", as referred to in Article 143(1)(e) of the VAT Directive, also cover
situations of importation where goods that have not been exported but were transported or dispatched from one of the EU-27 Member States to the United Kingdom before the withdrawal date are returned from the United Kingdom as from the withdrawal date.13 In these cases as there will be no export declaration available, the person who is reimporting the goods shall use alternative means to prove that the goods are re-imported in unaltered state within the time limit referred to in Article 203(1) of Regulation (EU) No 952/2013 laying down the Union Customs Code.14 Taxable persons in the EU should take all necessary steps to ensure that they can provide all necessary evidence with regard to their intra-Community supplies and intra-Community acquisitions to/from the United Kingdom before the withdrawal date, and with regard to all other supplies that they have made in, or received from, the United Kingdom before the withdrawal date. Taxable persons may have to familiarize themselves with customs procedures and formalities regarding import and export of goods.15                                                  12
See the guidelines of the VAT Committee of 13 March 2019 (https://ec.europa.eu/taxation_customs/sites/taxation/files/guidelines-of-the-vat-committee-in-case-of-no-deal_en.pdf
13
See the guidelines of the VAT Committee of 13 March 2019 (https://ec.europa.eu/taxation_customs/sites/taxation/files/guidelines-of-the-vat-committee-in-case-of-no-deal_en.pdf
14
OJ L 269, 10.10.2013, p. 1. 15
See Notice to stakeholders  Withdrawal of the United Kingdom and EU rules in the field of customs and indirect taxation, 30 January 2018.
5 1.1.4. Personal property imported after the withdrawal of the United Kingdom Article 4 of Directive 2009/132/EC provides for an exemption from VAT of personal property imported by natural persons when moving their place of residence from outside the EU to the EU. The exemption is subject to the possession of the personal property and, in the case of non-consumable goods, its use by the person concerned at his or her former normal place of residence for a minimum of six months before the date on which he or she ceases to have his or her normal place of residence outside the Union.  There may be situations where natural persons move their residence from the United Kingdom to the EU-27 on or after the withdrawal date. For natural persons moving their normal place of residence from the United Kingdom to an EU-27 Member State within 6 months as from the withdrawal date, the exemption laid down in Article 4 of Directive 2009/132/EC shall apply to personal property imported by such persons into the EU-27 as from the withdrawal date. 16 However, the exemption shall be subject to the following conditions: a. the goods concerned have been in the possession of and, in the case of non-consumable goods, used by the person concerned at his or her former normal place of residence in the United Kingdom for a minimum of six months (except in special cases justified by circumstances) before the date on which he or she ceased to have his or her normal place of residence outside the EU-27; and b. such property ha
borne the customs and/or fiscal charges to which it was normally liable in the United Kingdom or in one of the EU-27 Member States before the importation in the EU. 1.2. Treatment of supplies of services between the EU and the United Kingdom 1.2.1. EU rules on VAT for cross-border supplies of services EU VAT legislation provides for different regimes of VAT payments/returns for cross-border supplies of services to/from Member States and third countries.  The place of supply of services depends on various factors, such as the nature of the service, whether or not the person receiving the service is a taxable person, the place where the service is carried out, etc.                                                   16
See the guidelines of the VAT Committee of 13 March 2019 (https://ec.europa.eu/taxation_customs/sites/taxation/files/guidelines-of-the-vat-committee-in-case-of-no-deal_en.pdf

The withdrawal of the United Kingdom may have an impact for taxable persons established in the United Kingdom who supply services in the EU from the withdrawal date and for taxable persons established in the EU who supply services in the United Kingdom from the withdrawal date
In particular
Member States are permitted to require the designation of a tax representative if the taxable person supplying the services is established in a third country that does not provide administrative cooperation and recovery assistance for VAT.17 As of the withdrawal date, this requirement may apply to taxable persons established in the United Kingdom. Taxable persons established in the United Kingdom applying the Mini One-Stop Shop (MOSS) scheme for their Business-to-Consumer supplies of telecom, broadcasting and electronic services to customers in the EU will have to change their MOSS identification (see point 1.3. below). 1.2.2. Advice to taxable persons for preparing for a withdrawal without withdrawal agreemen
Taxable persons established in the EU should take all necessary steps to ensure that they can provide all necessary evidence with regard to the supplies of services before the withdrawal date that they have made in, or received from, the United Kingdom before the withdrawal date. Taxable persons established in the United Kingdom will have to examine whether new liability rules will apply to them with regard to their supplies of services that take place within the EU after the withdrawal of the United Kingdom.  1.3. Submission of VAT returns through the Mini One-Stop Shop scheme 1.3.1. The EU Mini One-Stop Shop scheme In accordance with Article 58 of the VAT Directive, VAT on Business-to-Consumer supplies of telecom, broadcasting and electronic services are subject to VAT in the Member State of consumption.  Articles 358 to 369k of the VAT Directive set the legal framework for special schemes for non-established taxable persons supplying telecommunications services, broadcasting or electronic services to non-taxable persons in the EU  the Mini One-Stop Shop (MOSS) schemes. MOSS allows a taxable person to submit a MOSS VAT return for each calendar quarter to the Member State of identification. That Member State of identification splits the MOSS VAT return by                                                  17
Article 204 of the VAT Directive.
7 Member State of consumption and forwards the details to the various Member States of consumption.  The VAT Directive provides for a MOSS scheme for taxable persons established in a Member State different from the Member State of consumption ("Union MOSS scheme"), and for a MOSS scheme for taxable persons established in a third country ("non-Union MOSS scheme"). 1.3.2. Advice to taxable persons for preparing for a withdrawal without withdrawal agreement a) Taxable persons established in an EU-27 Member State or in a third country, identified for MOSS in the EU-27 and making Business-to-Consumer supplies of telecom, broadcasting and electronic services to customers in the United Kingdom:  These taxable persons are liable to pay the VAT for services provided until and including the day before the withdrawal date (i.e. until and including 29 March 2019) in accordance with the VAT Directive. For the services provided in the United Kingdom before the withdrawal date, the United Kingdom must still be considered a Member State of consumption. Thus, MOSS VAT returns for the first calendar quarter of 2019 should also cover services provided in the United Kingdom up to the withdrawal date, even though taxable persons are to submit those MOSS VAT returns after the withdrawal date.
b) Taxable persons identified for MOSS in the United Kingdom and making Business-to-Consumer supplies of telecom, broadcasting and electronic services to customers in the EU-27 Member States:
These taxable persons are liable to pay the VAT for services in accordance with the VAT Directive. In the absence of a withdrawal agreement, in order to facilitate the submission of returns to the EU-27 Member States for the services supplied from 1 January 2019 until and including the day before the withdrawal date (i.e. until and including 29 March 2019), these taxable persons should take the following measures:
Taxable persons established in a third country and identified for MOSS in the non-Union MOSS scheme in the United Kingdom: These taxable persons should move their MOSS-identification from the United Kingdom to an EU-27 Member State. An early move  even before the first quarter of 2019  may facilitate future corrections of MOSS returns submitted before the withdrawal date.18                                                  18
Within the EU, corrective returns can be submitted until 3 years following the tax period concerned (Article 61(2) of Council Implementing Regulation (EU) No 282/2011).
8
Taxable persons established in a third country with a fixed establishment in the United Kingdom and in at least one EU-27 Member State: If these taxable persons have opted for identification for the Union MOSS scheme in the United Kingdom and maintain their fixed establishment in the United Kingdom, these taxable persons are in principle bound by their decision for the calendar year concerned and the two calendar years following (in accordance with the second paragraph of Article 369a of the VAT Directive). However, as they cannot remain identified for the Union MOSS scheme in the United Kingdom as from the withdrawal date, they should move their identification for the Union MOSS scheme from the United Kingdom to a Member State of the EU-27 with effect from the withdrawal date.19
Taxable persons established only in the United Kingdom: If these taxable persons have opted for identification for the Union MOSS scheme and maintain their fixed establishment in the United Kingdom, and want to continue to use the MOSS scheme, they should register for the non-Union MOSS scheme in a Member State of the EU-27 with effect from the withdrawal date, in accordance with Article 359 of the VAT Directive, since they will be considered as taxable persons not established within the EU as of the withdrawal date
If, in accordance with the advice given in section 1.3.2., taxable persons currently identified for MOSS in the United Kingdom become identified for MOSS in one of the EU-27 Member States, they could report their MOSS transactions of the first quarter of 2019 to customers in the EU-27 in the first MOSS VAT return which they submit in an EU-27 Member State in April 2019, in accordance with Article 369f of the VAT Directive.  2. VAT REFUND
2.1. EU rules for VAT refunds EU VAT legislation provides for different regimes of VAT refunds to taxable persons not established in the Member State in which they have paid VAT. This depends on whether the taxable person is established in the EU or in a third country. a) Taxable persons established in the EU:                                                   19
Article 369a, second paragraph, of the VAT Directive provides that these taxable persons are bound by their decision for the calendar year concerned and the two calendar years following. This implies that if their decision to identify for the Union MOSS scheme in the United Kingdom was taken before 2017, these taxable persons could already move their identification for the Union MOSS scheme to a
EU-27 Member State with effect before the withdrawal date.
9 According to Articles 170 and 171 of the VAT Directive, taxable persons established in a Member State can request a Member State where they are not established to refund the VAT paid there. The following procedure applies:
he refund request must be submitted electronically to the Member State of establishment at the latest on 30 September of the year following the refund period (Article 15 of Directive 2008/9/EC);

he refund request must be forwarded by the Member State of establishment to the Member State of refund within 15 days (Article 48(1) of Council Regulation (EU) No 904/201020);

he Member State of refund must take a decision on the refund request within 4 months (Article 19(2) of Directive 2008/9/EC); if the refund application is approved, the refund must be paid within 4 months + 10 working days (Article 22 of Directive 2008/9/EC); these periods can be prolonged if the Member State of refund asks additional information (Article 21 of Directive 2008/9/EC). b) Taxable persons established outside the EU:  According to the Thirteenth Council Directive 86/560/EEC of 17 November 1986 on the harmonization of the laws of the Member States relating to turnover taxes
Arrangements for the refund of value added tax to taxable persons not established in Community territory21
hereafter '13th VAT Directive'), VAT refunds by Member States to taxable persons established outside the EU are subject to the following conditions

he request must be submitted directly to the Member State from which the refund is requested, in accordance with the arrangements determined by that Member State (Article 3(1) of the 13th VAT Directive)

he VAT refund may be subject to a reciprocity condition (meaning that the refund is only permitted if VAT refund is also granted by the third country to taxable persons established in the Member State concerned (Article 2(2) of the 13th VAT Directive);

ach Member State may require the taxable person established in a third country to designate a tax representative in order to obtain the VAT refund (Article 2(3) of the 13th VAT Directive).                                                  20
Council Regulation (EU) No 904/2010 of 7 October 2010 on administrative cooperation and combating fraud in the field of value added tax
OJ L 268, 12.10.2010, p. 1
21
OJ L 326, 21.11.1986, p. 40.
10 2.2. Pending situations: refund of VAT charged before the withdrawal date in an EU-27 Member State to taxable persons established in the United Kingdom and not yet reimbursed
2.2.1. Submission of applications Those taxable persons who have not submitted a refund application before the withdrawal date, or in respect of which the refund application has not yet been forwarded by their State of establishment to the State of refund by that date, must submit or resubmit their refund application directly to the State of refund. For applications for refund from an EU-27 Member State, this submission shall be done according to the procedure of the 13th VAT Directive.22
2.2.2. Substantial rules Although, as from the withdrawal date, Directive 2008/9/EC ceases to apply to the United Kingdom, the rights and corresponding obligations of taxable persons derived from that Directive continue to apply with regard to VAT charged in an EU-27 Member State to a taxable person before the withdrawal date
23
This will encompass notably the right to a refund of VAT, the time limits to submit a refund application, the information to be provided, the time limits to be notified or to be requested to provide additional information, the time limits to provide the requested additional or further additional information, the time limits to be refunded and the right to receive interest in case of late payment. Further, for the purposes of Articles 16 and 17 of Directive 2008/9/EC, the refund applications relating to VAT charged from 1 January 2019 until and including the day before the withdrawal date shall be treated as relating to the remainder of a calendar year. The provisions on reciprocity (Article 2(2) of the 13th VAT Directive), on the appointment of a tax representative (Article 2(3) of the 13th VAT Directive) and on the exclusion of certain expenditure or possible additional conditions (Article 4(2) of the 13th VAT Directive) shall not be applicable in respect of VAT charged before the withdrawal date. However, in accordance with Article 273 of the VAT Directive, Member States may require the applicant to provide evidence of his status as taxable person or the original or copy of the invoices.                                                  22
As from the withdrawal date, a taxable person established in one of the EU-27 Member States or in the United Kingdom can no longer use the electronic portal set up by his State of establishment for submitting an electronic refund application in accordance with Article 7 of Directive 2008/9/EC. 23
See the guidelines of the VAT Committee of 13 March 2019 (https://ec.europa.eu/taxation_customs/sites/taxation/files/guidelines-of-the-vat-committee-in-case-of-no-deal_en.pdf).
11 2.2.3. Additional request
for information As from the withdrawal date the exchange of information between tax authorities relating to VAT refund applications provided for in Article 48(2) and (3) of Regulation (EU) No 904/2010 no longer applies in relation to the United Kingdom. Any request for information by the EU-27 Member State of refund with regard to a VAT refund application will therefore have to be addressed directly to the taxable person concerned.
2.3. Advice to taxable persons for preparing for a withdrawal without withdrawal agreement a) Taxable persons established in the EU-27 and requesting refunds from the United Kingdom: These taxable persons are entitled to a refund from the United Kingdom for the period until and including the day before the withdrawal date (i.e. until and including 29 March 2019). There is currently no certainty about the future UK-regime for VAT refunds to taxable persons established outside the United Kingdom. Therefore, taxable persons established in the EU-27 should consider requesting refunds from the United Kingdom while the United Kingdom is still a Member State, provided that the conditions set out in the VAT Directive and Directive 2008/9/EC are fulfilled.
b) Taxable persons established in the United Kingdom and requesting refunds from a
EU-27 Member State
As of the withdrawal date, requests by these taxable persons for a refund from the EU-27 Member States follow the procedural EU rules for taxable persons established outside the EU (see above).
The website of the Commission on taxation and customs union (https://ec.europa.eu/taxation_customs/index_en) provide
general information concerning the consequences of the possible withdrawal in the field of VAT. These pages will be updated with further information, where necessary.
European Commission Directorate-General Taxation and Customs Union
1
EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL TAXATION AND CUSTOMS UNION
Brussels, 11 March 2019
UIDANCE NOTE
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND CUSTOMS RELATED MATTERS  IN CASE OF NO DEAL The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. This means
the United Kingdom will
This guidance note addresses a situation where the UK becomes a third country on the withdrawal date without a withdrawal agreement and hence without a transition period provided for in the draft Withdrawal Agreement.
As of the withdrawal date, the Union rules in the field of customs no longer apply to the UK. The UK will be treated as any other third country with which the EU does not have any preferential trade relationship or customs or other agreements or arrangements
Preferences shall not be granted either to goods originating in the Overseas Countries and Territories which have special relations with the UK and are listed in Annex II of the TFEU (UK OCTs).
As of that date, appropriate rules in the field of customs, including the common customs tariff, and EU commercial policy measures will apply to the UK.  Furthermore, the UK will no longer have access to the EU customs IT systems.
In accordance with Article 50(3) of the Treaty on European Union, the European Council, in agreement with the United Kingdom, may unanimously decide that the Treaties cease to apply at a later date.
A third country is a country not member of the EU.
Cf. Part four of the Agreement on the withdrawal of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland from the European Union and the European Atomic Energy Community (OJ, C 66 I, 19.2.2019, p.
.
4
The UK OCTs listed in Annex II of the TFEU are: Anguilla, Cayman Islands, Falkland Islands, South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands, Montserrat, Pitcairn, Saint Helena and Dependencies, British Antarctic Territory, British Indian Ocean Territory, Turks and Caicos Islands, British Virgin Islands and Bermuda.
2
This guidance note aims to give guidance on the consequences for customs processes as of the withdrawal date
and should be read in conjunction with the Guidance note on excise issues.
1.
CONOMIC OPERATOR REGISTRATION IDENTIFICATION (EORI
a) Following the withdrawal of the UK the trade patterns of persons, established in the Union, who currently carr
out transaction
only with economic operators or other persons in the UK might change. While they are currently not involved in trade with third countries but only in intra-Union transactions, and hence have not been assigned an EORI number by any MS, they will carry out transactions requiring customs formalities. This requires, according to UCC
legislation, them to register with customs authorities in the Member State where they are established
Nothing prevents those economic operators to submit the required data or undertake the necessary steps for the registration (Annex 12-01 UCC DA8) already in advance of the withdrawal date
b) Two categories of persons currently established in the UK or registered with a UK EORI number need to be distinguished
Persons who are currently not involved in trade with third countries but only in intra-Union transactions
and who hence have not been assigned an EORI number by any MS, but as of the withdrawal date intend to carry out transactions requiring customs formalities, which, according to UCC legislation, requires them to be registered with customs authorities in the Union.   Economic operators and other persons, including third country operators, who have a currently valid EORI number assigned by the UK customs authority which will be invalid in the EU27 as of the withdrawal date
In this case, economic operators must be aware of the fact that they have to register with the competent customs authorit
in the EU27 and to use the new EORI number when applying for a customs decision after the withdrawal. Following the withdrawal, economic operators established in the UK or in another third country, have to register according to Article 9(2) UCC with the competent customs authority in a Member State. Economic operators that have a permanent business establishment in a Member State as defined in Article 5(32) UCC have to register with the customs authorities in the Member State where the permanent
This guidance note further complements the "Notices to stakeholders" published by the Commission services in the area of EU customs law (https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness/preparedness-notices_en#tradetaxud).
See https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness/preparedness-notices_en#tradetaxud.
Regulation (EU) No 952/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 9 October 2013 laying down the Union Customs Code
OJ L 269, 10.10.2013, p. 1).
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2015/2446 of 28 July 2015 supplementing Regulation (EU) No 952/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council as regards detailed rules concerning certain provisions of the Union Customs Code (OJ L 343, 29.12.2015, p. 1).
3
business establishment is situated. Economic operators that do not have a permanent business establishment in a Member State have to register in the Member State responsible for the place where they first lodge a declaration or apply for a decision; in addition, those economic operators need to appoint a fiscal representative, where required by current legislation
Nothing prevents also those economic operators to submit the required data or undertake the necessary steps for the registration (Annex 12-01 UCC DA) already in advance of the withdrawal date. Customs authorities of the Member States should accept requests already before the withdrawal date and assign to them EORI numbers with the withdrawal date as the starting date "YYYYMMDD
or thereafter, according to the requests of the persons concerned. 2.
USTOMS DECISIONS  2.1 Authorisations  The impact of the UK withdrawal on authorisations depends on the type of authorisation including the issuing customs authority, the holder of the authorisation and the geographical coverage.  Authorisations granted by UK customs authorities As a rule, any authorisation already granted by UK customs authorities are no longer valid in the EU27 as of the withdrawal date. The customs authorities of the UK are no longer an EUcompetent customs authority as of that date.
hen the UK accedes to the Convention on a common transit procedure
(CTC) as a Contracting Party in its own right as of the withdrawal date
authorisations granted by the UK for transit simplifications10 will no longer be valid in the EU27 Customs Decisions system, but need to be treated in the UK's national system as a Contracting Party to the CTC.  Authorisations granted by the EU27 customs authorities In general, authorisations granted by an EU27 customs authority will remain valid but need to be amended by the customs authority on their own initiative or following an application to amend from the economic operator in view of the geographical coverage or elements of the authorisation related to the UK and be amended as appropriate.11 However, authorisations granted to economic operators with UK EORI numbers are no longer valid in the EU27 as of the withdrawal date, unless the
OJ L 226, 13.8.1987, p. 2, as last amended by Decision 1/2017, OJ L 8, 12.1.2018, p 1. 10
Authorisations for comprehensive guarantee including waiver and authorisation
to use the electronic transport document (ETD) as a transit declaration for goods carried by air as authorisations with a link to the EU27
The use of the comprehensive guarantee requires a recalculation of the reference amount due to the changes of the customs status of the goods to be covered under common transit. 11
See Article 23(4)(a) UCC, Article 15 UCC DA.
4
economic operat
is established in the EU27, has the possibility to obtain an EU27 EORI and to apply for an amendment of the authorisation to include the new EU27 EORI instead of the UK EORI number. In order to facilitate the preparation by the stakeholders, it is also possible for the customs authority to amend authorisation
without a prior application. Th
authorisations granted to economic operators with EU27 EORI numbers, which are currently also valid in the UK need to be amended in order to take account of the withdrawal and the corresponding geographical coverage, e.g. in the authorisation concerning the Regular Shipping Service, the routes containing UK ports will have to be deleted.
Single Authorisation for Simplified Procedures (SASP) which today cover
the UK and a single MS will no longer be valid as of the withdrawal date. Nonetheless, it might be amended and could become a national authorisation
Where a SASP authorisation covers the UK and more than one EU27 Member State, that authorisation remains valid, but needs to be amended. In case the SASP authorisation covers simplified declarations, it should be noted that the economic operator needs to submit the supplementary declaration covering also the UK only for the period until the da
before the withdrawal date; a separate supplementary declaration covering the remaining Member States only has to be made for any remaining days of that calendar month
Authorisations to use the comprehensive guarantee where the guarantor is established in the UK will be suspended until the economic operator has replaced the UK guarantor by a guarantor established in the EU27
The use of the comprehensive guarantee requires a recalculation of the reference amount due to the changes of the customs status of the goods to be covered under common transit. Economic operators who currently do not require authorisations but whose situation will change as of the withdrawal date need to apply for the relevant authorisation. Operators who are currently holder
of authorisations granted by UK customs authorities and who draw the conclusion that they will meet the UCC requirements after the withdrawal need to apply for the relevant authorisations to the
27 customs authorities. The applications may already be submitted in advance of the withdrawal date to allow the competent customs authority to prepare taking the decision. In any case, the decision shall only take effect as of the withdrawal date at the earliest. This applies also to economic operators who are currently registered with a UK EORI, and have an EU27 Member State EORI number with a future starting date. In their case, however, the Customs Decision System (CDS) does not accept an EORI number, which will become valid only in the future, while it allows for a future validity date of the authorisation. Consequently, applications for authorisations, which are covered by CDS12 and submitted by those economic operators
have to be dealt with outside CDS. As of the withdrawal date, when the EORI becomes valid, the authorisation should be entered into the system.                                                            12 See Article 5 of Implementing Regulation 2017/2089, OJ L 297, 15.11.2017, p. 13.
5
2.2
ecision
relating to binding tariff information
BTI decisions
A decision relating to binding tariff information
BTI decision
is an official written decision issued by a customs authority which provides the applicant with an assessment of the classification of goods in the EU tariff nomenclature prior to an import or export procedure. The BTI decision is binding on all the EU customs authorities and the holder of the decision. The BTI decisions already issued by the customs authorities of the UK will no longer be valid in the EU27 as of the withdrawal date.  Any BTI applications submitted to the customs authorities of the UK or applications by or on behalf of persons holding a UK's EORI number made to the customs authorities of other Member States before the withdrawal date, but not processed before that date, shall not result in BTI decisions as of the withdrawal date.  The BTI decisions issued by the customs authorities of the EU27 Member States to holders with UK EORI numbers will no longer be valid as of the withdrawal date as the EORI numbers will no longer be valid in the customs territory of the Union and as BTI decisions may not be amended (Article 34(6) UCC). This will be reflected automatically in the EBTI-3 system. Those BTI decision holders shall register with the customs authorities in accordance with Article 9(2) and (3) UCC and Article 6 UCC DA to obtain a valid EORI number before applying for a new BTI decision in the EU27. The applicant could request a reissuing of his previous BTI decision by including a reference thereto in the application form.  2.3
ecision
relating to binding origin information
BOI decisions
A decision relating to binding origin information (BOI decision) is a written decision by a customs authority taken upon application, which provides its holder with a determination of the origin of goods prior to an import or export procedure. The BOI decision is binding on all the customs authorities in the EU and on the holder of the decision. The BOI decisions already issued by the customs authorities of the UK will no longer be valid in the EU27 as of the withdrawal date.  Any applications for BOI decisions submitted to the customs authorities of the UK or applications by or on behalf of persons holding a UK's EORI number made to the customs authorities of other Member States before the withdrawal date, but not processed before that date, shall not result in BOI decisions as of the withdrawal date.  In addition, with a view to taking BOI decisions as of the withdrawal date, the customs authorities of the EU27 shall not consider UK inputs (materials or processing operations) as having an 'EU origin' (for non-preferential purpose) or being of goods incorporating those inputs. The BOI decisions issued by the customs authorities of the EU27 to holders with UK EORI numbers will no longer be valid as of the withdrawal date, as the EORI numbers will no longer be valid in the customs territory of the Union insofar as BOI decisions
may not be amended (Article 34(6) UCC). Those BOI decision holders have the possibility to register with the customs authorities to obtain a valid EORI number before applying for a new BOI decision in the EU27. BOIs issued before the withdrawal date referred to goods including UK inputs (materials or processing operations) which were determinant for the acquisition of origin will no longer be valid as of the withdrawal date
3.
AGGAGE TAGS A baggage tag as set out in Annex 12-03 UCC IA may be affixed on hold baggage, which is scheduled to leave the UK with an aircraft before the withdrawal date, but arrives at an EU27 airport as of that date.  4.
ARIFF QUOTAS 4.1 First come-first served tariff quotas
equests by operators to benefit from Union tariff quotas according to the UCC which are based on declarations that have been accepted prior to the withdrawal date are eligible where the required supporting documents have been provided to the UK customs authorities prior to that date. Declarations accepted by the UK customs authorities as of the withdrawal date are not eligible to benefit from Union tariff quotas. Where the UK customs authorities have transmitted valid requests to the Commission without delay, the Commission will allocate quantities according to Article 51(2) UCC IA13 and will communicate the amounts allocated to the UK thereafter. 4.2 Tariff quotas managed by licences For licence-managed Union tariff quotas, the rights and obligations that arise from UK agricultural licences allocated by the licensing issuing authorities of the UK as well as those that were transferred to operators established in the UK will cease to be valid in the EU27 as of the withdrawal date. As of that date, EU27 customs administrations shall not any longer accept those licences.  Licences issued by EU27 licensing authorities will remain valid within the EU27, unless transferred to operators established in the UK. 5.
REFERENTIAL ORIGIN14 ASPECTS As of the withdrawal date the UK becomes a third country to which the EU preferential trade arrangements with third countries cease to apply.                                                            13
Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2015/2447
f 24 November 2015 laying down detailed rules for implementing certain provisions of Regulation (EU) No 952/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council laying down the Union Customs Code (OJ L 343, 29.12.2015, p. 558). 14
References to "originating" or "non-originating" in this section should be considered only in relation to preferential origin

5.1 Consideration of the preferential origin a) UK inputs As from the withdrawal date UK inputs (material or processing operations) are considered as 'non-originating' under preferential trade arrangements for the determination of the preferential origin of goods incorporating those inputs, in accordance with the Notice to stakeholders
Withdrawal of the United Kingdom and EU rules in the field of customs and external trade: Preferential origin of goods15   b) EU imports from the UK  Goods imported into the EU from the UK as of the withdrawal date will become non-originating goods for the purposes of their use under EU preferential arrangements. This means that:    i. Goods produced in the UK before the withdrawal date, if imported into the EU as of the withdrawal date, are not considered as EU originating for the purposes of their direct exportation, or exportation after further processing, to an EU preferential partner country. ii. Goods produced in the EU27 before the withdrawal date, if imported from the UK as of the withdrawal date
are not considered as EU originating for the purposes of their direct exportation, or exportation after further processing, to an EU preferential partner country. iii. Goods originating in preferential partner countries and imported into the UK before the withdrawal date in accordance with the preferences provided by EU trade preferential arrangements, if imported into the EU after withdrawal
are not considered as originating in the corresponding partner country. These goods can therefore not be used for cumulation purposes with that partner country (bilateral cumulation) or with other partner countries (diagonal cumulation) under the EU preferential arrangements.  c) EU exports to, and imports from, preferential partner countries via the UK  Goods imported as of the withdrawal date from the EU27 via the UK into a third country with which the EU has a preferential arrangement may be entitled for preferential treatment in that third partner country, provided that the provisions on direct transport/non-manipulation contained in the origin provisions of the relevant EU preferential arrangements are respected.  Similarly, goods imported as of the withdrawal date from EU partner countries into the EU via the UK may be entitled for preferential treatment in the EU provided that the provisions on direct transport/non-manipulation contained in the origin provisions of the relevant EU preferential arrangements are respected.                                                            15 https://ec.europa.eu/taxation_customs/sites/taxation/files/notice-to-stakeholders-brexit-preferential-origin-final_en.pdf
8
d) UK Overseas Countries and Territories  Materials originating and work or processing carried out in the UK Overseas Countries and Territories (Annex II TFEU), are not considered as originating when determining the origin of goods imported into the EU from other OCTs or from EU partner countries as from the withdrawal date. 5.2 Proofs of origin a) General principle:  In principle, proofs of origin can be issued or made out only if the products comply, at the time where the proofs are issued or made out, with the origin rules established in the relevant preferential trade agreement or arrangement. As of the withdrawal date, UK content will be considered as non-originating for the purposes of issuing or making out proofs of origin. Supporting documents (including proofs of origin and suppliers' declarations) can be relied upon for the issuance of proofs of origin on the condition that they do not concern UK content which is determinant for the acquisition of origin. Exporters and competent customs or other competent authorities issuing or making out such proofs of origin as of the withdrawal date are required to ascertain whether the supporting documents meet the conditions at the time of issuance of the proof.  b) Proofs of origin issued in the EU The following proofs of origin issued or made out before the withdrawal date in the EU remain valid, when the export of the consignment has been effected or ensured before the withdrawal date.
Proofs of origin issued or made out in the UK before the withdrawal date;
Proofs of origin issued or made out in the EU27 before the withdrawal date in relation to goods with a UK content;
Certificates of origin issued by EU27 customs authorities for UK exporters; Invoice declarations, origin declarations or statements on origin made out by UK exporters for the exportation of the EU originating products from the EU27 before the withdrawal date. The validity is limited to the period established under the relevant EU trade preferential arrangements, for the purpose of being used at importation in the partner country in accordance with the relevant provisions of the EU preferential arrangements. However, EU preferential partner countries may question such proofs of origin and request verification when they accompany goods imported in the preferential partner countries as of the withdrawal date. In these cases, the EU27 Member State customs authorities will reply, to verification requests, in accordance with the possibilities available to them to confirm the originating status of the goods or the authenticity of those proofs. For those purposes, the EU origin shall be determined as of the time
when the proofs were issued, in light of the principle described in the first paragraph above. c) Proofs of origin issued in the EU preferential partner countries Proofs of origin issued or made out in EU preferential partner countries before the withdrawal date in relation to goods with UK content which was determinant for the acquisition of the partner country origin, may be used for importation purposes in the EU during the period of its validity as provided under the relevant EU trade preferential arrangements, when the export of the consignment has been effected or ensured before the withdrawal date. However, UK content incorporated in goods with EU origin imported in the EU preferential partner countries and accompanied by a valid EU proof of origin may not be used in the EU preferential partner countries for cumulation purposes as of the withdrawal date.  5.3 Supplier's declarations for preferential trade purposes  Supplier's declarations are supporting documents on which basis proofs of origin can be issued. As of the withdrawal date, they can be relied upon for the issuance of proofs of origin on the condition that they do not include UK content which is determinant for the acquisition of origin. Exporters and competent customs or other competent authorities issuing or making out such proofs of origin as of the withdrawal date are required to ascertain whether supplier's declarations meet the conditions at the time of issuance of the proof. As of the withdrawal date:  Supplier's declarations made out by UK suppliers before the withdrawal date may not be used for the purposes of issuing or making out proofs of origin in EU27 Member States as of the withdrawal date.  Suppliers in EU27 Member States providing the exporter or the trader with the information necessary to determine the preferential origin status of goods through the originating status of the goods supplied before that date and for which they   In the case of long- the suppliers established in the EU27 should inform the exporter or trader if the long-term supplier's declaration is not valid any longer as of that date for all or some consignments covered by the long- 5.4 Exporters under preferential trade As of the withdrawal date, the following aspects should be considered: a) With respect to approved exporters for the purposes of making out invoice declarations or origin declarations in accordance with the relevant provisions on preferential origin of the Union:
10
Authorisations granted by UK customs authorities to exporters and re-consignors to be approved exporters are no longer valid in the EU27 as of the withdrawal date.   Authorisations granted by EU27 customs authorities to exporters and re-consignors established in the UK are no longer valid in the EU27 as of the withdrawal date
Authorisations granted by EU27 customs authorities to exporters and re-consignors established in the EU27 with a UK EORI number are no longer valid in the EU27 as of the withdrawal date
EU approved exporters and re-consignors established in the EU27 should inform the concerned national customs authority regarding changes on the fulfilment of the conditions subject to which they were authorised, considering that UK content will be non-originating as of the withdrawal date. Accordingly, EU27 customs authorities which authorised those exporters and re-consignors as approved exporters will amend or withdraw the authorisation as appropriate. b) With respect to registered exporters (REX) for the purposes of making out invoice declarations or origin declarations in accordance with the relevant provisions on preferential origin of the Union:  Registration by UK customs authorities of exporters and re-consignors in REX are no longer valid in the EU27 as of the withdrawal date.   Registrations by EU27 customs authorities to exporters and re-consignors established in the UK are no longer valid in the EU27 as of the withdrawal date.  Registrations by EU27 customs authorities to exporters and re-consignors established in the EU27 with a UK EORI number are no longer valid in the EU27 as of the withdrawal date
EU registered exporters and re-consignors established in the EU27 should inform immediately the concerned national customs authority on any relevant change relating to information they provided for the purposes of their registration. Accordingly, EU27 customs authorities which have registered those exporters and re-consignors will revoke the registration if the conditions for being registered are no longer met. 5.5 Origin quota derogations established in certain EU FTAs  Since origin quota derogations are covered by Article 56(4) UCC, the same rules as those for tariff quotas in Section 4.1 will apply.  6.
ALUATION As of the withdrawal date, for the goods produced in the UK using assists16 and imported into the EU27 after that date, the value of those assists will have to be added                                                            16
Goods and services referred to in Article 71
)(b) UCC.
11
to the customs value of the goods, in accordance with the conditions17 specified in Article 71(1)(b) UCC and Article 135 UCC IA. 7.
NTRY OF GOODS INTO THE CUSTOMS TERRITORY OF THE UNION 7.1 Entry summary declaration (ENS) Goods brought from the UK into the customs territory of the Union as of the withdrawal date shall be covered by an entry summary declaration (ENS), where required, which has to be lodged within the time-limits set out in the UCC DA18. That covers also the goods moving between two points in the customs territory of the Union via the UK.
transit declaration comprising all security and safety data may be used to comply with ENS requirements and subject to time-limits being respected, e.g. where common transit is used
Where an ENS was lodged at the customs office of first entry in the UK before the withdrawal date, it will not remain valid for subsequent ports or airports in the EU27 where the goods are arriving as of that date. The economic operator shall lodge a new ENS covering all goods arriving in the EU27. Where in those cases the operator could not comply with the respective time-limits, the ENS lodgement should be accepted. Where an ENS was lodged at the customs office of first entry in the EU27 before the withdrawal date, with subsequent ports located in the UK and in the EU27, and where the vessel after calling at a UK port arrives in a subsequent EU27 port as of the withdrawal date, an ENS for all goods on the vessel shall be lodged. The same applies in case of diversions. Goods covered by an ENS, which had been lodged before the withdrawal date with a customs office in the UK, were diverted and arrive in the EU27 instead as of the withdrawal date. In such case, the previous ENS will be deleted by the system and deemed not having been lodged after 200 days and the economic operator has to lodge a new ENS for the goods then brought to the EU27.  In the specific cases where goods leave the UK directly for the EU27 before the withdrawal date and arrive in the customs territory of the Union as of that date, no ENS is required.  7.2 Temporary storage of goods (TS) Authorisations for the operation of temporary storage facilities granted by the UK customs authorities will cease to be valid in the EU27 as of the withdrawal date. Authorisations granted by the EU27 customs authorities including the possibility to move goods to a temporary facility in the UK will have to be amended to exclude such possibility as of the withdrawal date.                                                             17
The value of assists, apportioned as appropriate, has to be added to the price when they are supplied directly or indirectly by the buyer/importer for use in connection with the production and sale for export of the imported goods, to the extent that their value has not been included in the price actually paid or payable. 18
Article 105 UCC DA, as amended by Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2019/334 of 19 December 2018, OJ L 60, 28.2.2019, p.
.
12
Where goods in TS covered by an authorisation for the operation of TS facilities granted by the UK customs authorities will be moving between a temporary storage facility in the UK and another one in the EU27 and will arrive at the EU27 border as of the withdrawal date, those goods will be treated as non-Union goods brought to the customs territory of the Union from a third country. Where those goods arrive in the EU27 already before the withdrawal date, but their movement to an EU27 TS facility is intended to continue as of that date, that movement will not be covered by a valid authorisation. Therefore, temporary storage for those goods should end before the withdrawal date (e.g. by placing the goods under a customs procedure or re-exporting them). If such regularisation does not take place, there will be a non-compliance of the obligations laid down in the customs legislation concerning the introduction of non-Union goods into the customs territory of the Union and therefore Article 79 UCC will apply, i.e. a customs debt due to non-compliance will incur. In the case of goods in TS covered by an authorisation granted by the EU27 customs authorities and located in the UK as of the withdrawal date, such goods will be deemed to have been re-exported. 7.3 Customs status of goods As a general rule, for Union goods which are moving as intra
nion movement from the UK around the withdrawal date, their treatment will depend on when they enter the customs territory of the Union: where they enter the EU27 before the withdrawal date, they will keep their customs status of Union goods; where they arrive at the EU27 external border as of the withdrawal date, they will be treated as any other third-country goods.  For Union goods moving between two points in the customs territory of the Union via the UK, where the movement starts as an intra-Union movement, a proof of Union status shall be accepted where those goods re-enter the customs territory of the Union only as of the withdrawal date after having crossed the UK. Besides that, any formalities required for goods re-entering the customs territory of the Union will be required, e.g. ENS. Where Union goods are carried by air and have been loaded or transhipped at a UK airport for consignment to an EU27 airport and are carried under a single transport document (STD) according to Article 119(2)(a) UCC DA issued in the UK and that movement actually leaves the UK airport before the withdrawal date and arrive
at an EU27 airport on the withdrawal date, those goods will keep their Union status
This will be practically relevant only for aircraft leaving from a UK airport in the late hours before 00:00 CET on the withdrawal date on a direct flight to an EU27 airport and arriving there after 00:00 CET on the withdrawal date
Where Union goods are carried by sea on a vessel assigned to a regular shipping service and the vessel called within an ongoing voyage at a UK port and left that UK port actually before the withdrawal date and arrived directly  at an EU27 port as of the withdrawal date, i.e. without calling at any other port in a territory outside the customs territory of the Union or at any free zone in a Union port, and has not made any transhipments of goods at sea, those goods will keep their Union status. Where Union goods are carried by sea on a non-regular shipping service vessel and that vessel leaves a UK port actually before the withdrawal date for an EU27 port and  13
arrives at that port as of the withdrawal date, a proof of the customs status of Union goods shall be accepted.  Where motorised road vehicles registered in an EU27 Member State are returning from the UK and re-enter the customs territory of the Union, Article 208 UCC IA applies. To goods in baggage carried by a passenger arriving from the UK Article 210 UCC IA applies. Where packaging with Union status is returning from the UK as of the withdrawal date, its Union status shall be considered as proven in accordance with the rules set out in Article 209 UCC IA. 7.4
elief from import duty Returned goods Where Union goods were temporarily exported from the UK before the withdrawal and are re-imported in the EU27 as of the withdrawal date complying with the conditions established in Article 203 UCC, those goods shall be considered returned goods and hence be imported with total relief.  Where Union goods are brought from the EU27 to the UK before the withdrawal date and where then such goods move back to the EU27 as of the withdrawal date, the provisions on returned goods referred to in Article 203 UCC should apply if the economic operator can provide evidence that the Union goods:  were transported to the UK prior to the withdrawal date; and   return in an unaltered state in accordance with Article 203(5) UCC and Article 158 UCC DA.  The withdrawal of the UK as such, however, may not be used as special circumstances in order to exceed the three-year period referred to in Article 203(1) UCC. The proof that the Union goods were brought to the UK prior to the withdrawal date should be provided in particular by the respective transport documents and, if necessary, accompanied by other relevant documents (e.g. a lease contract). Where applicable, a proof may be required that the state of the goods has not been altered.  Duty Relief Regulation Concerning the duty relief for personal property belonging to natural persons transferring their normal place of residence from a third country to the Union, Article 5 of the Duty Relief Regulation19 foresees a continuous period of at least twelve months at a normal place of residence outside the customs territory of the Union for duty-free treatment.  For that personal property as well as for other categories of goods covered by the Duty Relief Regulation, e.g. goods imported on the occasion of a marriage set out in Article 12 Duty Relief Regulation, the requested periods, e.g. the period of residence,                                                            19
Council Regulation (EC) No 1186/2009 of 16 November 2009 setting up a Community system of reliefs from customs duty, OJ L 324, 10.12.2009, p. 23
14
may include also the period of application of that Regulation. 8.
PECIAL PROCEDURES 8.1 Transit Union/common transit procedures As of the withdrawal date, the UK accedes to the Convention on a common transit procedure20 (CTC) in its own right, hence it may use common transit and continue to have access to the New Computerised Transit System (NCTS
as a Contracting Party to the CTC. Consequently, the transit operations ongoing at the time of the withdrawal shall continue in the NCTS.  Situations where goods were released for a transit procedure in the EU27 or in a common transit country or in the UK and are moving to, from or via the UK:  a) Goods moving under a transit operation from a customs office of departure in the EU27 or in a common transit country to a customs office of destination in the UK
Where goods are placed under a Union transit procedure in the EU27 or under a common transit procedure in a common transit country with destination in the UK and those goods are still located in the EU27 as of the withdrawal date, that Union transit procedure will continue as a common transit procedure in the UK
The customs office of entry in the UK will play the role of a customs office of transit, i.e. it shall request the relevant data from the customs office of departure and fulfil all tasks of a customs office of transit. At the external EU27 border an exit summary declaration (EXS
has to be lodged
or security and safety purposes, unless the particulars necessary for risk analysis for security and safety purposes have already been provided with the transit declaration or the obligation to lodge a pre-departure declaration is waived under the UCC.  Where the goods are already located in the UK as of the withdrawal date, the transit movement will continue to the customs office of destination. b) Goods moving under a transit operation from a customs office of departure in the UK to a customs office of destination in the EU27 or in a common transit country  Where goods are placed under a Union transit procedure in the UK with destination in the EU27 or in a common transit country and the goods are still located in the UK as of the withdrawal date, that Union transit procedure will continue as a common transit procedure to the destination in the EU27 or in the common transit country
The customs office of entry in the EU27 will play the role of a customs office of transit, i.e., it shall request the relevant data from the customs office of departure and fulfil all tasks of a customs office of transit. At the external EU27 border an ENS has to be                                                            20
OJ L 226, 13.8.1987, p. 2, as last amended by Decision 1/2017, OJ L 8, 12.1.2018, p 1.
15
lodged for security and safety purposes, unless the particulars necessary for the ENS have already been provided with the transit declaration or the obligation to lodge an ENS is waived under the UCC.  Where the goods are already located in the EU27 as of the withdrawal date, that transit procedure continues to the destination in the EU27 or in the common transit country
c) Goods moving under a transit operation via the UK
Where goods move between a customs office of departure in an EU27 Member State or in a common transit country via the UK to a customs office of destination in an EU27 Member State or in a common transit country and those goods are still located in the EU2
or in a common transit country as of the withdrawal date, that transit procedure will continue as a common transit procedure in the UK
The customs office of entry in the UK and the customs office of entry in the respective Member State where the movement re-enters the customs territory of the Union, respectively, will play the role of customs offices of transit. They shall request the relevant data from the customs office of departure and fulfil all tasks of a customs office of transit. When leaving the EU27 territory (before entering to the UK) an EXS has to be lodged, unless the particulars necessary for risk analysis for security and safety purposes have already been provided with the transit declaration or the obligation to lodge a pre-departure declaration is waived under the UCC.  Where the goods have crossed the UK and re-entered the customs territory of the EU27 or of a common transit country before the withdrawal date, that transit operation will continue until its destination.  Where the goods covered by a transit declaration are crossing the UK at the time of the withdrawal or have crossed and left the UK, but have not yet re-entered the customs territory of the EU27 by the time of the withdrawal, the customs office of entry into the EU27 will act as a customs office of transit. It shall request the relevant data from the customs office of departure and fulfil all tasks of a customs office of transit. At the external EU27 border an ENS has to be lodged, unless the particulars necessary for the ENS have already been provided with the transit declaration or the obligation to lodge an ENS is waived under the UCC
Customs authorities may, for a period up to one year after UK accession to the CTC, continue to accept existing forms of the guarant undertaking
and guarantee certificates21 subject to the necessary geographical adaptations made manually and approved authorities themselves (in case of guarantee certificates). By the end of that period, the holder of that procedure must provide a new undertaking according to the modified model. Where an enquiry or recovery procedure was started, but not ended at the time of withdrawal, it is continued in the NCTS.                                                            21
Annexes 32-01, 32-02 and 32-03 and Chapters VI and VII in Part II of Annex 72-04 to the UCC IA.
16
Electronic transport document (ETD) used as a transit declaration for goods carried by air or sea Where goods are placed under an ETD transit procedure in the EU27 or in a common transit country with destination in the UK and the goods do not arrive in the UK before the withdrawal date that procedure will continue as an ETD common transit procedure to the UK airport of arrival as of that date.
Where goods are placed under an ETD transit procedure in the UK with destination in the EU27 or in a common transit country and the goods do not arrive in the EU27 or in the common transit country before the withdrawal date that procedure will continue to the airport in the EU27 or in a common transit country as of that date. Where goods are carried by sea under an ETD transit procedure between the UK and the EU27 and the regular shipping service vessel ha
left the UK port before the withdrawal date and arrived directly at an EU27 port as of the withdrawal date
i.e. without calling at any other port in a territory outside the customs territory of the Union or at any free zone in a Union port, and has not made any transhipments of goods at sea, the transit procedure will continue to its EU27 destination
Movement of goods under the TIR operations The UK (as all other Member States) is already today a Contracting Party to the TIR Convention22 will no longer be part of the customs territory of the Union, border formalities will apply to TIR operations. Although the UK will have access to the NCTS as a Contracting Party to the CTC, that access does not cover the use of the NCTS for TIR operations. a) Goods moving under a TIR operation from a customs office of departure/entry in the EU27 to a customs office of destination/exit in the UK Where goods are placed under a TIR procedure in the EU27 with destination/exit in the UK and those goods are still located in the EU27 as of the withdrawal date, that TIR procedure will, at the latest, be terminated for the Union territory at the customs office of the physical exit from the EU27. That office will become the customs office of destination/exit. It shall request the relevant data from the customs office of departure and fulfil all tasks of a customs office of destination/exit23. For the exit of the goods at the external border of the EU27, an EXS is to be lodged, unless the particulars necessary for risk analysis for security and safety purposes have already been provided or the obligation to lodge a pre-departure declaration is waived under the UCC.  Where the goods are already located in the UK or have left but not yet arrived in the UK as of the withdrawal date, the TIR movement will be subject to UK customs law and to the TIR Convention. However, the UK customs office of destination/exit will                                                            22
Customs Convention on the International Transport of Goods under cover of TIR carnets done at Geneva on 14 November 1975, OJ L 252, 14.9.1978, p. 2. 23
In particular the tasks stipulated by Articles 278 and 279 UCC IA.
17
not be able to send any NCTS TIR messages to the customs office of departure/entry located in the EU27 and thus this office will not be able to discharge those TIR operations in the NCTS with the usual electronic messages. Therefore, the holders of the procedure will have to provide an alternative proof of terminating the TIR procedure, and the customs office will have to terminate and discharge the operation manually.  b) Goods moving under a TIR operation from a customs office of departure/entry in the UK to a customs office of destination/exit in the EU27  Where goods are placed under a TIR procedure in the UK with destination in the EU27 and the goods are still located in the UK as of the withdrawal date, that TIR movement cannot continue until the destination in the EU27. When the goods arrive at a customs office at the external EU27 border, the operation will be treated as any TIR operation coming from a third country and formalities established for those goods will apply24. An ENS has to be lodged at entry into the EU27 at the UK/EU27 border, unless the particulars necessary for the ENS have already been provided or the obligation to lodge an ENS is waived under the UCC. In the NCTS, the transit procedure started in the UK cannot be closed with the usual IE messages, the UK will have to write it off manually. A new NCTS TIR movement has to be lodged by the operator with the customs office at the external EU27 border which will act as a custom
office of departure/entry for the TIR operation within the EU.  Where goods are placed under a TIR procedure in the UK with destination in the EU27 and the goods are already located in the EU27 as of the withdrawal date, that TIR movement can continue until the destination in the EU27. When the goods arrive at a customs office of destination/exit, the operation will be treated as any other TIR operation. c) Goods moving under a TIR operation via the UK
Where goods move between a customs office of departure/entry in an EU27 Member State via the UK to a customs office of destination/exit in an EU27 Member and those goods are still located in the EU27, before crossing the UK, the following applies: as of the withdrawal date, that TIR procedure shall, at the latest, be terminated at the customs office of exit from the EU27. This office then becomes the customs office of destination/exit. The "new
customs offices of destination/exit will request the relevant data from the customs office of departure and fulfil all tasks of a customs office of destination/exit. For the exit of the goods at the external border of the EU27, an EXS is to be lodged, unless the particulars necessary for risk analysis for security and safety purposes have already been provided or the obligation to lodge a pre-departure declaration is waived under the UCC. Where the goods have crossed the UK and re-entered the customs territory of the EU27 before the withdrawal date the TIR movement can continue until destination.                                                            24
TIR Handbook Section 1.2, Articles 273, 275 and 276 UCC IA, Article 184 UCC DA, Annex 10 (4) TIR Convention,  Article 19 and Annex 2 TIR Convention.
18
Where the goods covered by a TIR Carnet are crossing the UK by the time of the withdrawal, the following applies: the goods arriving at the EU27 external border will have to be treated as any other TIR movement coming from a third country and formalities established for those goods will apply. An ENS has to be lodged before entering the customs territory of the EU27 again at the UK/EU27 border unless the particulars necessary for the ENS have already been provided or the obligation to lodge an ENS is waived under the UCC. However, in the NCTS, the TIR procedure started in the EU27 Member State could continue. 8.2 Special procedures other than transit Customs warehousing (CW) UK authorisations for customs warehousing are no longer valid in the EU27 as of the withdrawal date, including those which allow for the movement of goods between different customs warehouses. The same will apply to authorisations for movements of goods from customs warehousing facilities located in the EU27 to customs warehousing facilities locate
in the UK included in customs warehousing authorisations  granted by the EU27 customs authorities (see Article 179(3) UCC DA).  Where goods stored in a UK customs warehouse are brought to the EU27 as of the withdrawal date, they have to fulfil the customs formalities established in the UCC for non-Union goods entering the customs territory of the Union from outside this territory (i.e. ENS, temporary storage declaration and customs declaration).
here goods will be moving between a customs warehouse in the UK and another one in the EU27 and arrive in the EU27 within a short period before the withdrawal date without sufficient time to reach the destination, and their movement continues in the EU27
as of that date those goods are not covered by an authorisation valid in the EU27. Therefore, the concerned economic operator should discharge this procedure before the withdrawal date (e.g. by placing the goods under a subsequent customs procedure). Such subsequent procedure may be CW as well, provided that the goods are covered by a valid authorisation granted by the EU27 customs authorities. If such regularisation does not take place, the concerned goods would not comply with the obligations laid down in the customs legislation concerning the storage of such goods within the customs territory of the Union and therefore Article 79 UCC will apply, i.e. a customs debt due to non-compliance will incur
If goods placed under CW located in the EU27 are brought to the UK before the withdrawal date (i.e. because the movement was authorised by the customs authorities) and such goods are located in the UK as of the withdrawal date, the CW procedure will be deemed to have been discharged (i.e. the goods would be considered to be taken out of the customs territory of the Union). The economic operator concerned should provide a proof, if requested by the customs authorities, showing that the goods were brought to the UK before the withdrawal date (e.g. a transport document).
Free zones  Where goods placed under a free zone procedure in the UK are brought to the EU27 as of the withdrawal date, they have to fulfil the customs formalities established in the  19
UCC for non-Union goods entering the customs territory of the Union from outside this territory (i.e. ENS, temporary storage declaration and customs declaration)
Temporary admission (TA) Any authorisations granted by the UK customs authorities to place goods under TA before the withdrawal date will not be valid in the EU27 as of that date. The procedure for goods moved under those authorisations according to Article 219 UCC to the EU27 and located in the EU27 as of the withdrawal date should be discharged before that date, so the goods have to be a) re-exported, b) placed under a subsequent customs procedure, c) destroyed with no waste remaining, or d) abandoned to the State. Such subsequent procedure may be TA as well, provided that the goods are covered by a valid authorisation granted by the EU27 customs authorities. If such discharge does not take place, the concerned goods would not comply with the obligations laid down in the customs legislation concerning the TA of such goods within the customs territory of the Union and therefore Article 79 UCC will apply, i.e. a customs debt due to non-compliance will incur. Where goods placed under temporary admission (TA) covered by an authorisation granted by the EU27 before the withdrawal date are located in the UK customs territory as of that date, and are brought from the UK to the EU27, they have to comply with the customs formalities established in the UCC for goods entering the customs territory of the Union from outside this territory (i.e. ENS, temporary storage declaration and customs declaration).  Where goods placed under TA in the EU27 are moved to the UK before the withdrawal date and such goods are located in the UK as of the withdrawal date, the TA procedure will be deemed to have been discharged (i.e. the goods would be considered to be taken out of the customs territory of the Union). The economic operator concerned should provide a proof, if requested by the customs authorities, showing that the goods were brought to the UK before the withdrawal date (e.g. a transport document).
End-use (E-U) Any authorisations granted by the UK customs authorities to place goods under E-U before the withdrawal date will not be valid in the EU27 as of that date. The procedure for goods covered by those authorisations and located in the EU27 as of the withdrawal date should be discharged before that date, so the goods have to be a) taken out of the customs territory of the Union, b) used for the purposes laid down for the application of the duty exemption or reduced rate of duty, c) destroyed with or without waste remaining, or d) abandoned to the State. The same applies in the case of authorisations for Transfer of Rights and Obligations (TORO) and for movement of goods as established in Articles 218 and 219 UCC. If the discharge mentioned above does not take place, the concerned goods would not comply with the obligations laid down in the customs legislation concerning the E-U of such goods within the customs territory of the Union and therefore Article 79 UCC will apply, i.e. a customs debt due to non-compliance will incur. Where goods placed under end-use (E-U) before the withdrawal date are located in the UK customs territory as of that date, and move therefrom to the EU27, they have to  20
comply with customs formalities applicable to any other third-country goods (i.e. ENS, temporary storage declaration and customs declaration).  Where goods placed under E-U in the EU27 are moved to the UK before the withdrawal date, and such goods are located in the UK as of the withdrawal date, the
U procedure will be deemed to have been discharged (i.e. the goods would be considered to be taken out of the customs territory of the Union). The economic operator concerned should provide a proof, if requested by the customs authorities, showing that the goods were brought to the UK before the withdrawal date (e.g. a transport document).
Inward processing (IP) Any authorisations granted by the UK customs authorities to place goods under IP before the withdrawal date will not be valid in the EU27 as of that date. The procedure for goods moved under those authorisations according to Article 219 UCC to the EU27 and located in the EU27 as of the withdrawal date should be discharged before that date, so the goods have to be a) re-exported, b) placed under a subsequent customs procedure, c) destroyed with no waste remaining, or d) abandoned to the State. Such subsequent procedure may be IP as well, provided that the goods are covered by a valid authorisation granted by the EU27 customs authorities. If such discharge does not take place, the concerned goods would not comply with the obligations laid down in the customs legislation concerning the processing of such goods within the customs territory of the Union and therefore Article 79 UCC will apply, i.e. a customs debt due to non-compliance will incur. Where goods placed under inward processing (IP) before the withdrawal date are located in the UK customs territory as of that date, and are brought from the UK to the EU27, they have to comply with the customs formalities established in the UCC for goods entering the customs territory of the Union from outside this territory (i.e. ENS, temporary storage declaration and customs declaration)
In case of an IP EX/IM authorisation granted by UK customs authorities, if equivalent goods are exported before the withdrawal date, the equivalent amount of goods (raw material) should be brought to the customs territory of the Union with total relief from import duty before the withdrawal date. Otherwise, if the equivalent goods were brought to the customs territory of the Union as of the withdrawal date, they would be treated as third country goods entering the EU territory and the relevant import duties would apply. Where goods placed under IP in the EU27 are moved to the UK before the withdrawal date, and such goods are located in the UK a
of the withdrawal date, the IP procedure will be deemed to have been discharged (i.e. the goods would be considered to be taken out of the customs territory of the Union). The economic operator concerned should provide a proof
if requested by the customs authorities
showing that the goods were brought to the UK before the withdrawal date (e.g. a transport document).  Outward processing (OP) Any authorisations granted by the UK customs authorities to place goods under OP before the withdrawal date will not be valid in the EU27 as of that date. If the  21
processed products resulting from goods placed under OP (authorisation granted by UK authorities) were not brought to the UK, but to the EU27, as of the withdrawal date, such processed products must comply with the customs formalities established in the UCC for non-Union goods brought to the customs territory of the Union. Such products cannot benefit from OP (i.e. the calculation of import duty cannot be done according to Article 86(5) UCC). In case of an OP IM/EX authorisation granted by UK customs authorities, if equivalent goods are brought to the customs territory of the Union before the withdrawal date, the equivalent amount of goods (raw material) should be exported within the time limit of the authorisation. If such export does not take place, this would entail a non-compliance with the obligations laid down in the customs legislation concerning the OP procedure and therefore Article 79 UCC will apply, i.e. a customs debt due to non-compliance will incur
9.
OODS TAKEN OUT OF THE CUSTOMS TERRITORY OF THE UNION  9.1 Pre-departure declaration According to Article 263(3) UCC, the pre-departure declaration takes the form of either (i) a customs declaration for goods to be taken out of the customs territory of the Union; (ii) a re-export declaration; or (iii) an EXS. In most cases, the pre-departure declaration will be provided in the form of a customs declaration.  Where a pre-departure declaration was lodged and, where applicable, goods were released in the UK before the withdrawal date, that declaration will not be valid where those goods enter the EU27 as of the withdrawal date to exit via the EU27 and a new pre-departure declaration will be required for those goods in the form of a re-export declaration or of an EXS, which has to be lodged within the time-limits set out in the UCC DA.25 9.2 Export and re-export Where Union goods are to be brought from the EU27 to the UK and the economic operator has no knowledge whether the goods are taken out of the EU27 before the withdrawal date, those goods may only be placed under the export procedure at any designated customs office in the EU27 as of the withdrawal date. a) Export from the EU27 crossing the UK or with a customs office of exit in the UK  Where goods were released for export from the EU27 before the withdrawal date and are carried to the customs office of exit in the UK or cross the UK on their way to a customs office of exit in another EU27 Member State, there are the following possible scenarios:  i. Where the goods on their way to the UK customs office of exit are still located in the EU27 as of the withdrawal date, the previously foreseen customs office                                                            25
Article 244 UCC DA, as amended by Commission Delegated Regulation XXX (EU) 2019/334 of 19 December 2018, OJ L 60, 28.2.2019, p. 1.
22
of exit need
to be replaced by a customs office of exit located at the EU27 border (the diversion of the export movement is executed in ECS). This customs office will confirm the physical exit of the goods and send the respective message to the customs office of export. The same applies to goods on their way to an EU27 customs office of exit which are before crossing the UK still in the customs territory of the Union. ii. Where the goods on their way to the UK customs office of exit are already located in the UK as of the withdrawal date, the UK will not be able to send any messages via ECS confirming the physical exit of the goods. The customs office of export located in the EU27 will have to close the movement in ECS based on an alternative proof. Economic operators need to provide alternative proofs to the customs office of export in order to close the movement. iii. Where the goods already have crossed the UK on their way to a customs office of exit located in another Member State, there will be no impact on the current procedure (i.e. the customs office of exit at the external EU27 border will still confirm the physical exit of the goods to the customs office of export).  b) Export from the UK with a customs office of exit located in the EU27 iv. Where goods released for export from the UK with
customs office of exit in the EU27 are still located in the UK as of the withdrawal date, they will be subject to UK customs procedures when exiting the UK. When those goods enter the customs territory of the Union as of the withdrawal date, they will be treated as any other third country goods, i.e. an ENS shall be lodged at the first entry point of the EU27, the goods will have to be placed in temporary storage and, to reach the customs office of exit, they can be placed under external transit procedure. When the goods have reached the EU27 customs office of exit, then a re-export notification, a re-export declaration or an EXS at the EU27 customs office of exit should be lodged.  v. Where goods released for export in the UK via an EU27 customs office of exit are already located in the EU27 as of the withdrawal date and reach the envisaged EU27 customs office of exit, that customs office will not be able to confirm the physical exit of the goods to the UK customs office of export, as the UK will be disconnected from the ECS as of the withdrawal date. The customs office of exit should, upon request from the economic operator, issue a proof of exit (e.g. in the form of endorsement of the EAD).  10.
USTOMS CONTROLS ON IPR, SAFETY
HEALTH AND THE ENVIRONMENT Safety, health and environment EU legislation requires goods imported in the EU, in transit or exported outside the EU to comply with a number of safety, health and environmental rules. It is the role of customs to check if goods entering or leaving the EU comply with all those rules. As of the withdrawal date, the goods brought to the customs territory of the Union from the UK or taken out from the customs territory of the Union to the UK will be subject to those rules.  The controls on the compliance with those rules can include documentary checks on import/export licences for certain goods as well as physical checks on the goods and  23
involves close cooperation and coordination with competent authorities who are responsible for the correct application of the relevant legislative requirements. It is important to emphasise that customs will only release the goods once the relevant competent authority has fully completed their controls and this has been communicated to customs via the established procedures (e.g. authorisations, licences, electronic data communication system between customs and competent authority, etc.). Import / export licences for certain goods Economic operators engaged in shipments of goods which are subject to import/export licences or which may become subject to import/export licences as of the withdrawal date are reminded of the legal repercussions which need to be considered when the UK becomes a third country. They should confirm that their goods meet all licencing obligations in order to prepare for possible changes as a result of no deal.  Further details on the consequences of withdrawal in the field of import / export licences for certain goods can be found in the "Notice to Stakeholders on the Withdrawal of the UK and EU rules in the field of import / export licences for certain goods
published on 25 January 201826 and in sectorial preparedness notices, such as the "Notice to stakeholders  withdrawal of the United Kingdom and EU waste law"27
the "Notice to stakeholders  withdrawal of the United Kingdom and EU rules in the field of export and import of hazardous chemicals"28, and the "Notice to stakeholders  withdrawal of the United Kingdom and EU rules on trade in protected species of wild fauna and flora"29. All preparedness notices are available, in all official languages of the EU, on the "Brexit preparedness website"30 of the Commission. On 19 December 2018, the Commission adopted a proposal for a Regulation31 that would add the UK to the list of third countries covered by the EU General Authorisation 001 that lifts the requirements for individual licenses when trading in dual-use items. Intellectual Property Rights For the enforcement of IPR, as of the withdrawal date the EU rules on customs enforcement of intellectual property rights, and in particular Regulation (EU) No 608/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 June 2013 concerning customs enforcement of intellectual property rights, no longer apply to the UK. Further details on the consequences of withdrawal in particular on the submission and validity of Union applications for action can be found in the "Notice to Stakeholders                                                             26
http://trade.ec.europa.eu/doclib/docs/2018/january/tradoc_156568.pdf
27
https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/file_import/waste_law_en_0.pdf 28
[to be added  will be finalised shortly] 29
https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/file_import/trade_in_protected_species_en.pdf
30
https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness/preparedness-notices_en
31
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?qid=1550165775514&uri=CELEX:52018PC0891
24
Withdrawal of the UK and EU rules in the field of customs enforcement of intellectual property rights
32 Drug Precursors With regard to EU legislation laying down rules for the monitoring of trade between the EU and third countries, Council Regulation (EC) 111/2005 in drug precursors33, certain operators will need to have obtain a licence/registration and for certain transactions import/export authorisations will be needed when trading with the UK.
European Commission Directorate-General Taxation and Customs Union                                                            32
https://ec.europa.eu/taxation_customs/sites/taxation/files/notice-to-stakeholders-brexit-ip-enforcement-final_en.pdf
33
OJ L 22, 26.1.2001, p. 1.
EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL TAXATION AND CUSTOMS UNION
Brussels, 11 March 2019
UIDANCE NOTE
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND ASPECTS OF EXCISE IN RELATION TO MOVEMENT OF GOODS ONGOING ON THE WITHDRAWAL DATE The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. This means that as from 30 March 2019, 00:00h (CET)
the United Kingdom will be a third country
This guidance note addresses a situation where the UK becomes a third country on the withdrawal date without a withdrawal agreement and hence without a transition period provided for in the draft Withdrawal Agreement.
As of the withdrawal date, the Union rules in the field of excise no longer apply to the UK. The UK will be treated as any other third country and the rules in the field of excise will apply as of that date. Furthermore, the UK will no longer have access to the EU excise IT systems. This guidance note provides guidance on the consequences of this for the cross-border intra-EU movement of excise goods between the UK and EU27, which started before the withdrawal date and will end thereafter. This document covers as well as the related features (e.g. registration and authorisations of economic operators, administrative cooperation). This document should be read in conjunction with the Guidance Note on customs issues.
Intra-EU cross-border movements of excise goods are subject to conditions and procedures specified in Directive 2008/118/EC and its related implementing regulations. Excise goods may be moved under duty suspension or while already released for consumption ("duty paid"). In the former case (duty suspension), registration and

n accordance with Article 50(3) of the Treaty on European Union, the European Council, in agreement with the United Kingdom, may unanimously decide that the Treaties cease to apply at a later date.
A third country is a country not member of the EU.
Cf. Part four of the Agreement on the withdrawal of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland from the European Union and the European Atomic Energy Community (OJ, C 66 I, 19.2.2019, p. 1

See also the "Notices to stakeholders" published by the Commission services in the area of EU customs law (https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness/preparedness-notices_en#tradetaxud).
authorisation of Economic Operators are pre-requisite; moreover, the procedures are computer-based and supported by pan-European IT systems called EMCS
for movement control and SEED
for registering excise economic operators. The withdrawal of the UK may have an impact for Economic Operators involved in the intra-EU cross-border movements of excise goods to, from, and via the UK. In particular, consignors, consignees, and guarantors should prepare for a withdrawal of the UK without a withdrawal agreement and examine their new obligations and liabilities as of the withdrawal date
1.
VERVIEW OF THE EXCISE CONSEQUENCES OF A O DEAL WITHDRAWAL OF THE UK 1.1. General Principles Excise goods that enter the excise territory of the EU from the UK or are dispatched or transported from the excise territory of the EU to the UK will respectively be treated as importation or exportation of excise goods in accordance with Council Directive 2008/118/EC of 16 December 2008 concerning the general arrangements for excise duty
Goods in transit crossing the UK land bridge between Ireland and the rest of the European Union will also be subject to additional customs formalities. 1.2. Pan-European IT system EMCS The Excise Movement and Control System (EMCS) on its own will no longer be applicable to excise duty suspended movements of excise goods from the EU into the UK, but those movements will be treated as exports, where excise supervision ends at the place of exit from the EU. Movements of excise goods to the UK will therefore require an export declaration as well as an electronic administrative document (e-AD). In case of movements of excise goods from the UK to the EU customs formalities will have to be completed before a movement under EMCS can begin
1.3. Customs Formalities If economic operators wish to continue moving excise goods to the UK or receiving goods from the UK they will need to familiarise themselves with customs formalities and should be prepared to register with the customs authorities in the Member State where they are established, in order to be assigned an EORI number, if they do not already have one. Nothing prevents those economic operators submitting the required data for the registration (Annex 12-01 UCC-DA)
before the withdrawal date. Further details can be
Excise Movement and Control System
System for Exchange of Excise Data
OJ L9, 14.1.2009, p. 12
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2015/2446 of 28 July 2015 supplementing Regulation (EU) No 952/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council as regards detailed rules concerning certain provisions of the Union Customs Code (OJ L343, 29.12.2015, p. 1)
found in the Commission services.
Stakeholders of excise movements should also consult the  Withdrawal of the United Kingdom and customs-related matters in case of no 10, in particular for further details about Union status, import, export and transit. 2.
NGOING INTRA
NION CROSS-BORDER MOVEMENTS An  is an intra-Union cross-border movement of excise goods that began but did not end before the withdrawal date. 2.1. General Principles As of the withdrawal date:  Unless explicitly stated otherwise in this document, UK authorisations and decisions are no longer valid in EU27. Consequently, any e-AD11, SAAD12 or fallback excise document approved by the UK competent authority before the withdrawal date is no longer a valid proof of Union status for the goods.  No electronic messages can be exchanged between the UK and EU27 Member States via EU-managed communication platforms such as CCN; consequently, no EMCS message and no CCN Mail message may be exchanged between the UK and EU27 Member States
No new intra-EU movement of excise goods to or from the UK may start; a corollary is that no new e-AD or SAAD may be assigned for such movements.  Unless explicitly stated otherwise in this document, all ongoing movements of excise goods from or to the UK will be considered as movements from or to a third country with all applicable consequences (e.g. status of non-Union goods, applicable customs procedures, excise duty claims, or seizing of the goods in case of non-compliance). Attention is drawn to the fact that Economic Operators, who start intra-Union cross-border movement of excise goods to/from the UK just before the withdrawal date, run a significant risk as that they can no longer be ended appropriately as mentioned in the following sections. This will generate a significant administrative burden for all stakeholders, with a risk of irregularities.  Moreover, if the excise goods arrive at destination before the
https://ec.europa.eu/taxation_customs/uk_withdrawal_en; and https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness/preparedness-notices_en#tradetaxud
10
https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness/preparedness-notices_en#tradetaxud 11
electronic Administrative Document 12
Simplified Accompanying Administrative Document
withdrawal date, Economic Operators should submit the report of receipt or SAAD Copy 3 (where applicable) as soon as possible to ensure the excise movement is also completed before the withdrawal date.  Moreover, stakeholders involved in an excise movement to or from the UK that is at risk not to be completed before the withdrawal date should take contingency measures (e.g. contact exporters or importers where appropriate) in due time, taking into account the distance between the UK and the EU27 Member States.13 2.2. Excise goods under Duty Suspension For ongoing movement
of excise goods under duty suspension to, from or through the UK:  Unless explicitly stated otherwise in this document,
Reports of Receipt or of Export cannot be electronically exchanged and fallback documents are no longer automatically mutually recognised between EU27 and the UK;
Ongoing EMCS movements will have to be closed by ad-hoc means (e.g. Manual Closure); alternate evidence of exit of the EU27 territory may be used to this purpose. Annex I  Recommended alternate evidence of exit
The data in fallback Administrative Documents related to excise movements from or to the UK may not be inserted into EMCS as of the withdrawal date as the UK will no longer be a valid Member State in this IT system. This exceptional case can cause an excise movement to remain partly or totally outside of EMCS.  As of the withdrawal date, the consignor authorisation required under Council Directive 2008/118/EC issued by the UK is no longer valid. However, if excise goods from the UK are in the EU27 territory on the withdrawal date
Member States should consider such movements as valid and they should be allowed to be closed normally14
If excise goods from the UK have not entered the EU27 before the withdrawal date, then the excise movement cannot be completed normally. The excise goods would be subject to customs formalities applicable to imports and subject to excise duty at importation, or would need to be placed in a tax warehouse or a new EMCS movement started for the place of importation under the responsibility of a registered consignor authorised in the Member State of importation
Alternatively an external transit movement, as provided                                                  13
For instance, a movement between the UK and Malta can take more than one month
14
E.g. via a Report of Receipt from the EU27 consignee or via a Report of Export from the EU27 Member State of Export; this report of receipt/export cannot however be forwarded to the UK, which was still the Member State of Dispatch at the beginning of the excise movement.
under the Union transit procedure, to the Member State of Destination can be started, which might reduce delays and formalities. Note: in any case, the EU27 Member State of Destination will have to close in an exceptional way (e.g. interruption) the excise movement in EMCS that began in the UK before the withdrawal date
If excise goods moving to the UK are still in the EU27 territory on the withdrawal date, the excise movements will no longer have a valid consignee. The consignor would have to issue a change of destination to report that the goods would be
returned to the consignor, or
sent to a new consignee in EU27 authorised to receive the goods
or
exported; this of course would require the lodging of an export declaration  If excise goods moving to the UK from the EU27 have entered the UK but the excise movement ha
not been closed before the withdrawal date then the latter cannot be closed normally in EMCS, since there is no longer a valid consignee for an intra-EU movement
However, Member States should treat such movements as valid and to allow to close them manually based on alternate evidence of exit of the EU27 (see above).
xcise goods moving through the UK between two EU27 Member States (e.g. from Belgium to Ireland) on the withdrawal date will be subject to customs formalities, if and where applicable, but the excise movement can still be completed normally.15
he excise movementeAD or fallback document will be a sufficient proof of Union status to avoid payment of import duty in the EU27. Other customs formalities will be the same as for other goods
Note: as the UK will have acceded to the Convention on a Common Transit Procedure16 by the withdrawal date, this should facilitate crossing the land bridge by allowing EMCS to be used in parallel with NCTS17, which should reduce delays and formalities
15
Council Directive 2008/118/EC article 17(1) 16 https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=LEGISSUM%3Al11025 17 New Computerised Transit System
The table below summarises the possibilities for ongoing excise movements under duty suspension: Movement Goods location on withdrawal date in UK in EU27 From UK to EU27 Customs formalities; closure (e.g. interruption) of the EMCS movement by EU27 MS of Destination + possible new e-AD from place of importation Consider excise movement as valid and to be closed normally From EU27 to UK alternate evidence of exit (evidence that goods are in the UK) to close the movement at EU27 MS of Dispatch Change of destination Through UK Customs formalities to enter EU27 MS of Destination and eAD/FAD is proof of Union status in MS of Destination: normal completion in other EU27 MS: Customs formalities to go through UK if applicable and eAD/FAD is proof of Union status
2.3. Excise goods already released for consumption (Duty Paid) Business-to-Business For intra-EU business-to-business movement of excise goods already released for consumption to or from the UK started before but still ongoing on or after the withdrawal date
EU excise procedures no longer apply; in particular, SAAD paper documents are no longer mutually recognised between EU27 and the UK;  If excise goods from the UK are in the territory of the EU27 on the withdrawal date, Member States should treat such movements as valid and to allow the consignee to close them
Where the consignee of a duty paid business-to-business movement can prove that the goods entered the territory of the EU27 before the withdrawal date but has not submitted the SAAD to the Member State of destination before this date to close the movement, the competent authority of the EU27 Member State of Destination should accept the SAAD.  If excise goods from the UK are still in the UK on the withdrawal date then they will be subject to import formalities on arrival in the EU27, including payment of excise duty at the border, unless the goods are placed under excise duty suspension within the EU27. A new excise movement would then have to be started from the Member State of importation to the Member State of Destination; alternatively an
external transit movement, as provided under the Union transit procedure, to the Member State of Destination can be started, which might reduce delays and formalities.  If excise goods moving to the UK are in the territory of the EU27, other than the Member State of dispatch on the withdrawal date, Member States should apply the same approach to such movements as they apply to the exceptional export of goods released for consumption to other third countries. In particular, where goods under cover of an SAAD cross the territory of a Member State other than the Member State of dispatch, that Member State is recommended to continue to accept the SAAD as a proof of a valid excise movement and not to charge excise duty if export formalities are fulfilled and where the goods exit for the UK. This requires an export declaration to be lodged. The Commission also recommends that the Member State of dispatch refunds or remits the already paid excise duty if the consignor provides a proof of exit.
The goods can also be returned to the location of Dispatch under cover of the SAAD
If excise goods moving to the UK are in the territory of the UK on the withdrawal date then proof of the end of the movement and payment of duty in the UK would have to be obtained that met the needs of the MS of Dispatch. There is no legal obligation for a Member State to refund excise duty in the case of exported duty paid goods. However, if the certified copy 3 of the SAAD was issued by the UK18 before the withdrawal date this should be treated as a normal excise movement and requests for refund of excise duty in the Member State of dispatch should be treated normally. Other refunds would be at the discretion of the MS of Dispatch.
xcise goods moving through the UK between two EU27 Member States (e.g. from Belgium to Ireland) may be subject to Customs formalities, although import duty should not be charged, since the SAAD is a valid proof of Union status.
Note: as the UK will have acceded the Convention on a Common Transit Procedure by the withdrawal date, this should facilitate crossing the land bridge by allowing the use of NCTS19, which should reduce delays and formalities
Note: Refunds of excise duty may not be available due to lack of legally acceptable evidence and the absence of a common legal base for refunds of excise duty on the export of duty paid goods. Any remission or reimbursement of excise duty in these circumstances is a national matter.
18 Or other document issued by the UK and accepted by the Member State of Dispatch, certifying that the goods have been delivered and the chargeable excise duty has been paid in the UK 19 New Computerised Transit System
Business-to-Consumer (Distance Selling) The same principles as business-to-business apply mutatis mutandis to distance selling procedures for intra-EU cross-border distance sales of excise goods to or from the UK started before but still ongoing on or after the withdrawal date. No distance sales of excise goods from or to the UK may start as of the withdrawal date. 2.4. EMCS ARC Follow Up The "EMCS ARC Follow Up20" feature on the europa.eu website (to enter production in February 2019) will remain available for EMCS movements to/from the UK that started before the withdrawal date. However, as described above, no new information exchange to/from the UK can be received via trans-European IT systems for the movements that were not completed before the withdrawal date. Consequently, the status of such movements will not be updated in "EMCS ARC Follow Up" as of the withdrawal date
For instance, if an ongoing movement to the UK is closed manually after the withdrawal date by the EU27 Member State of Dispatch then the manual closure will be visible only in the National Excise Application of this Member State and not in the common domain of EMCS. Therefore, the manual closure and the related status update of the movement will not be visible in EMCS ARC Follow Up. Member States are recommended to inform economic operators of this limitation and the unreliability of this information around the period of the withdrawal of the UK
3.
XCISE DEBT
EXEMPTIONS AND GUARANTEE As of the withdrawal date
no guarantee will be automatically mutually recognised between the UK and EU27 Member States;  no exemption will be automatically mutually recognised between the UK and EU27 Member States;  no excise debts will be managed between the UK and EU27 Member States; and  there will be no legal basis for calling upon guarantees held by UK consignors and/or consignees.                                                  20 EMCS ARC Follow Up is a feature that allows a user to enter an Administrative Reference Code and get limited information on the related EMCS movement (e.g. status, MS of Dispatch, MS of destination, list of main messages exchanged); it is a publicly available feature that requires neither identification nor authentication.
4.
CONOMIC OPERATORS REGISTRATION AND AUTHORISATION 4.1. Overview This section applies only to the Economic Operators registered in SEED, i.e. authorised to perform intra-EU cross-border movements of excise goods under duty suspension. 4.2. Expiration of UK registrations and authorisations As of the withdrawal date, the registration of Economic Operators established in the UK and their authorisation will be invalid. Consequently
they will not be able to send or receive new e-ADs (see also section
). Member States are also recommended to check that e-ADs have not been accepted before Brexit, but with a dispatch date recorded in the future after the withdrawal date.21 Member States should request that economic operators do not submit e-ADs with dispatch dates to after the withdrawal date.   No creation, update or new invalidations of registrations and authorisations of Economic Operators established in the UK will be possible after the withdrawal date
The records of such Economic Operators and authorisations will be kept in SEED for 4 years so that ongoing movements can be closed manually and EU27 Member States' auditors and other staff can access UK Economic Operators data. 4.3. "Orphan" EU27 Tax Warehouses As illustrated in the schema hereafter, it may happen that Tax Warehouses in the territory of EU27 are related only to Tax Warehouse Keepers established in the UK. In this case, such Tax Warehouses will be left "orphan" (i.e. with no authorised warehouse keepers established in EU2722) after the withdrawal date. This implies that such Tax Warehouses will actually not be able to operate intra-EU27 cross-border movements of excise goods under duty suspension.  Member States Administrations and Economic Operators are advised to take all necessary measures before the withdrawal date in order to avoid such situations. A measure can be to assign a valid warehouse keeper established in a EU27 Member State
21
An e-AD can be submitted up to 7 days before the planned date of dispatch
22 After the withdrawal date, the record of the UK tax warehouse keepers will still be present in SEED but their authorisation will be invalid. 10 Before withdrawal date After withdrawal date

EU27 warehouse UK authorised keepers only EU27 warehouse No EU27 authorised keeper
4.4. Access of the UK to SEED As of the withdrawal date, no SEED data will be shared with the UK. In particular:  SEED data will not been synchronised any longer with UK national IT systems
the officials of the UK administration will have no access to SEED on WEB (SEED's human user interface, which allows reading and modifying SEED data). This implies that as of the withdrawal date, EU27's and the UK's view of each other's Economic Operators data will be the "snapshot" at the time of the withdrawal date, when the latest data synchronisation will have occurred. 5.
EFERENCE DATA 5.1. Customs Office List and Excise Role As of the withdrawal date all excise roles will be removed from all UK customs offices in the Customs Office List. 5.2. Code Lists As of the withdrawal date, excise IT systems' code lists will not be shared with the UK. 6.
TATISTICS As of the withdrawal date, the officials of the UK administration will have no access to excise trans-European IT systems' operational statistics provided by the central IT component CS/MISE, neither via its user interface nor via consolidated reports. 7.
VAILABILITY MANAGEMENT As of the withdrawal date, no excise IT system's unavailability will be shared between the UK and EU27. 11 8.
DMINISTRATIVE COOPERATION As of withdrawal date, the Administrative Cooperation Regulation23 and the Naples II Convention, no longer apply to the UK. All pending administrative cooperation procedures on the withdrawal date on the basis of EU law between the EU27 Member States and the UK will be discontinued on the withdrawal date.
As of the withdrawal date, n
information exchange will be possible between the UK and EU27 Member States via excise trans-European IT systems such as EMCS or CCN Mail
It will no longer be possible to make new administrative cooperation requests or to receive or to send replies to open administrative cooperation requests.  However, mutual assistance requests concerning excise issues may be possible between certain Member States and the UK using the OECD-Council of Europe Convention of 25.1.1988 on mutual administrative assistance in tax matters.24
European Commission
irectorate
eneral Taxation and Customs Union
23
Council Regulation (EU) No 389/2012 24 Administrative cooperation in the field of excise duties: OECD-Council of Europe Convention of 25.1.1988 on mutual administrative assistance in tax matters between the UK (not including Gibraltar) and the following MS of the EU27: BE, BG, CZ, DK, EE, ES, FR, EL, HU, LV, NL, PL, PT, RO, FI, SI, and SE. Member States are advised to examine the detail content of their act of accession to check for potential reservations. 12
ANNEX

ECOMMENDED ALTERNATE EVIDENCE OF EXIT A document in which the competent authority of the UK certify the delivery25 or the entry into the UK territory in accordance with the rules and procedures applicable to that certification may be considered an appropriate alternate evidence of exit by EU27 Member States
Moreover, EU27 Member States may also take into account anyone of the following pieces of evidence or a combination of them:  (i) a delivery note;  (ii) a document signed or authenticated by the economic operator who has taken the excise goods out of the customs territory of the Union certifying the exit of the goods;  (iii) a document in which the customs authority of a Member State or a third country certify the delivery in accordance with the rules and procedures applicable to that certification in that State or country; (iv) records of goods supplied to ships, aircraft or offshore installations kept by economic operators; (v) other alternative pieces of evidence acceptable to the authorities of the  Member State of dispatch.
Competent authorities in each EU27 Member State perform their own assessment of the validity of such evidence.
25 Even though fallback documents are no longer automatically mutually recognised between the UK and EU27, a fallback report of receipt certified by a UK competent authority may be considered an appropriate evidence of delivery by the competent authority of a EU27 Member State.

EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL TRADE
Brussels, 21 March 2019
OTICE TO STAKEHOLDER
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND EU RULES IN THE FIELD OF DUAL USE EXPORT CONTROLS The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. This means that as from 30 March 2019, 00:00h (CET)
the United Kingdom will be a third country
Preparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for EU and national authorities but also for private parties.  In view of the uncertainties surrounding the ratification of the Withdrawal Agreement, all interested parties, and especially economic operators, are reminded of legal repercussions, which need to be considered when the United Kingdom becomes a third country
Subject to the transition period provided for in the Withdrawal Agreement,
as of the withdrawal date, the EU rules on dual-use export controls, and in particular, Regulation (EC) No 428/2009 setting up a Community regime for the control of exports, transfer, brokering and transit of dual
use items
(the "Regulation") will no longer apply to the United Kingdom. This has in particular the following consequences:
1.
UAL-USE EXPORTS TO THE UNITED KINGDOM
The Regulation provides for the control of the export, brokering and transit of dual-use items. As of the withdrawal date, controls under the Regulation will appl
in relation to the United Kingdom as third country.

n accordance with Article 50(3) of the Treaty on European Union, the European Council, in agreement with the United Kingdom, may unanimously decide that the Treaties cease to apply at a later date.
A third country is a country not member of the EU.
Cf. Part four of the Agreement on the withdrawal of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland from the European Union and the European Atomic Energy Community (OJ C 66 I, 19.2.2019, p. 1

OJ L 134, 29.5.2009, p. 1
5
This notice complements the  to stakeholders
Withdrawal of the United Kingdom and EU rules in the field of import/export licences for certain goods
2 Please note: Considering that the United Kingdom is a party to relevant international treaties and a member of international non-proliferation regimes, and applies proportionate and adequate controls, the European Commission adopted on 19 December 2018 a proposal for an amendment to the Regulation adding the United Kingdom to the list of destinations covered by EU General Authorisation (EU001)

he proposal, once adopted by the co-legislators, will simplify exports of most dual-use items to the United Kingdom
while ensuring a uniform and consistent application of controls throughout the EU and preserving international and EU security. 2.
XPORT LICENSES ISSUED BY THE UNITED KINGDOM AS AN EU
EMBER STATE
s of the withdrawal date, export licences issued by the United Kingdom as an EU Member State under the Regulation are no longer valid for exports of dual-use items from the EU-27 to third countries.
Rather, such exports of dual-use items from the EU-27 to third countries are going to require
as of the withdrawal date, a licence issued by a competent authority of one of the EU-27 Member States, in accordance with Article 9 of the Regulation. 3.
NTRA-EU TRANSFER LICENCES TO THE UNITED KINGDOM ISSUED BEFORE THE WITHDRAWAL DATE According to Article 22 of the Regulation, certain very sensitive dual-use items, listed in Annex IV to the Regulation, are subject to intra-EU transfer controls. As of the withdrawal date, the export of these items will be subject to authorisation under the terms and conditions of the Regulation.  However, intra-EU transfer licences issued by one of the EU27 Member State
for transfers to the United Kingdom issued before the withdrawal date should be
onsidered as valid licence
for exports to the United Kingdom as of the withdrawal date
and until the validity of the licence expires. The website of the Commission (http://ec.europa.eu/trade/import-and-export-rules/export-from-eu/dual-use-controls/) provide
general information concerning dual-use export control. These pages will be updated with further information, where necessary.
European Commission
irectorate
eneral Trade
COM(2018) 891 final
7
See also section 2 of the
Withdrawal of the United Kingdom and EU rules in the field of import/export licences for certain goods
EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL TAXATION AND CUSTOMS UNION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL TRADE
Brussels, 25 March 2019
OTICE TO STAKEHOLDER
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND EU RULES ON CUSTOMS DEBT AND CUSTOMS TARIFFS The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union . On 22 March 2019
the European Council (Article 50) decided, in agreement with the United Kingdom
and in the event that the Withdrawal Agreement is approved by the House of Commons by 29 March 2019, to extend the 2-years period provided for in Article 50(3) TEU until 22 May 2019.  In the event that the Withdrawal Agreement is not approved by the House of Commons by 29 March 2019, the European Council decided to extend the period provided for in Article 50(3) TEU until 12 April 2019. This means that as from 13 April 2019, 00:00h ed Kingdom may
Preparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for EU and national authorities but also for private parties.  In view of the uncertainties surrounding the ratification of the Withdrawal Agreement, all interested parties, and especially economic operators, are reminded of legal repercussions, which need to be considered when the United Kingdom becomes a third country. Subject to the transition period provided for in the Withdrawal Agreement
as of the withdrawal dat
the EU rules on customs debts for non-Union goods, as set out in particular in Regulation (EU) No 952/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 9 October 2013 laying down the Union Customs Code
will apply to goods from the United Kingdom. This has in particular the following consequences:

A third country is a country not member of the EU.
Cf. Part four of the Agreement on the withdrawal of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland from the European Union and the European Atomic Energy Community (OJ, C 66 I, 19.2.2019, p. 1

3
OJ L 269, 10.10.2013, p. 1

Please note: this notice does not address:
non-tariff aspects in relation to the entry and import of goods, export of goods to the United Kingdom
such as import and export licences
specific import conditions for industrial goods (such as medicinal products6) and other commodities (such as waste7), and sanitary
(in particular of live animals
including pets10) and phytosanitary11 controls;
aspects in relation to value added tax12 and excise duties13
-
spects in relation to trade-defence measures, in particular anti-dumping and anti-subsidy measures and other tariff measures provided for in the agricultural sector
-
pecific rules for individual travellers.14

The webpage of the Commission on external trade on the Market Access Database (http://madb.europa.eu/madb/rulesoforigin_preferential.htm) will be updated with relevant information, whenever available.
See the "notices to stakeholders" published here: https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/file_import/import_and_export_licences_en.pdf
6
See the "notices to stakeholders" published here: https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness/preparedness-notices_en#sante
7
See the "notices to stakeholders" published here: https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/file_import/waste_law_en_0.pdf
8
See the "notices to stakeholders" published here: https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness/preparedness-notices_en#sante
See the "notices to stakeholders" published here: https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/file_import/movements_of_live_animals_en.pdf
10
See the "notices to stakeholders" published here: https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness/preparedness-notices_en#travel
11
See the "notices to stakeholders" published here: https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/file_import/plant_health_en.pdf
12
See the "notices to stakeholders" published here: https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/value-added-tax_en.pdf
13
https://ec.europa.eu/info/files/guidance-excise-ongoing-movements-goods_en 14
See the "notices to stakeholders" published here: https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness/preparedness-notices_en#travel

1.
USTOMS DEBT
GENERAL Depending on the customs procedure chosen15, a customs debt on import is incurred through the placing under one of the customs procedures of non-Union goods liable to import duty. In particular, according to Article 77 UCC, a customs debt on import shall be incurred through the placing of non-Union goods liable to import duty under the customs procedure of release for free circulation in the Union. The customs debt is defined by Article 5(18) UCC as the obligation on a person to pay the amount of import or export duty which applies to specific goods under the customs legislation in force. The amount of import duty resulting from a customs debt is calculated on the basis of four main elements:   The customs value of the goods, in case of ad valorem import duty, or specific quantities, in case of specific import duty, serving as taxable amount;  The tariff classification of the goods in the Combined Nomenclature laid down in Council Regulation (EEC) No 2658/87
The non-preferential origin of the goods, for the application of non-preferential tariff measures (e.g. a GATT tariff quota or an anti-dumping duty); and/or the preferential origin of the goods, for the application of preferential tariff measures contained in agreements, concluded by the Union with certain third countries or territories (Free Trade Agreements), or adopted unilaterally by the Union in respect of certain third countries or territories (e.g. the Generalised Scheme of Preferences
GSP); and  The rates of import duty to apply to the taxable amount (customs value or quantity), which depend on the tariff classification of the goods and their origin. 2.
USTOMS VALUE OF THE GOODS According to Article 70 UCC16 the primary basis for the customs value of a good is its transaction value, which is the price actually paid or payable for the goods when sold for export to the customs territory of the Union, adjusted where necessary
15
See the "notices to stakeholders" published here: https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/file_import/customs_and_indirect_taxation_en.pdf. For issue
arising around the withdrawal date in case of no deal, please refer to the guidance note on Customs matters
https://ec.europa.eu/info/files/guidance-customs-matters-case-no-deal_en
as well the guidance note on Excise for ongoing movements of goods
https://ec.europa.eu/info/files/guidance-excise-ongoing-movements-goods_en). 16
The full list of the legal references to customs value can be found in the compendium on customs value: https://ec.europa.eu/taxation_customs/sites/taxation/files/customs_valuation_compendium_2018_en.pdf
4 To determine the customs value of the good, that price shall be supplemented
where not already included in the transaction value
by a number of adjustments, which include, inter alia, the following:  Commissions and brokerage, except buying commissions
Costs of containers and packing;  The value of certain goods and services supplied by the buyer in connection with the production and sale for export of the imported goods, free of
Royalties and licence fees related to the goods that the buyer must pay as a condition of sale of the goods;  The costs of transport and insurance and the loading and handling charges associated with the transport of the good, up to the place where it is brought into the customs territory of the EU.17 On the other hand, a number of elements do not need to be included in the customs value like, inter alia, the cost of transport or various charges incurred on the goods after their entry into the customs territory of the Union, charges for interest under certain financing arrangements, charges for the right to reproduce the goods, buying commissions, import duties or other charges payable on import. For details, please refer to the guidance on customs valuation: https://ec.europa.eu/taxation_customs/sites/taxation/files/resources/documents/customs/customs_code/guidance_valuation_en.pdf 3.
USTOMS TARIFF Council Regulation (EEC) No 2658/87 of 23 July 1987 on the tariff and statistical nomenclature and on the Common Customs Tariff18 sets out the applicable tariffs for non-Union goods. These are also published and constantly updated in the multilingual database TARIC.19 To establish the third country duty rate goods have to be classified (Article 57 UCC) in the Combined Nomenclature (CN) to determine the CN headings and subheadings. For example:
otor cars and other motor vehicles principally designed for the transport of persons, with a cylinder capacity not exceeding 1500cm3: CN code                                                  17
In this context, the Commission is planning to adopt an amendment to the Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2015/2447 of 24 November 2015 laying down detailed rules for implementing certain provisions of Regulation (EU) No 952/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council laying down the Union Customs Code
OJ L 343, 29.12.2015, p. 558
18
OJ L 256, 7.9.1987, p. 1. 19
https://ec.europa.eu/taxation_customs/business/calculation-customs-duties/what-is-common-customs-tariff/taric_en

8703 31 10  third country duty rate is 10.00% of the customs value of the goods.  Vacuum cleaners with self-contained electric motor of a power not exceeding 1 500 W and having a dust bag or other receptacle capacity not exceeding 20
iters: CN code 8508 11 00  third country duty rate is 2.2% of the customs value of the goods.  Crispbread: CN Code 1905 10 00  third country duty rate is 5.80% of the customs value of the goods + 13.00 EUR/100kg
Frozen carcasses and half-carcasses of high-quality beef and veal: CN code 0202 10 00  third country duty rate is 12.80% of the customs value of the goods + 176.80 EUR/100kg
4.
RIGIN OF THE GOOD In case of no-deal as from the withdrawal date imports from the UK will be treated as imports from any third country with which the EU does not have any preferential arrangement. Therefore, only of relevance are the EU non-preferential rules of origin. The basic rules on the non-preferential origin of goods are laid down in Articles 59 to 63 UCC. Article 59 UCC establishes the scope of the rules for the determination of the non-preferential origin of goods for the purposes of the application of non-preferential tariff measures (e.g. GATT tariff quotas or anti-dumping duties), of measures related to trade in goods other than tariff measures (e.g. certain prohibitions) and of other Union measures relating to the origin of goods (e.g. external trade statistics).
ccording to Article 60 UCC, goods wholly obtained in a country shall be regarded as having their origin in that country. Where the production of goods involves more than one country, the country of origin is deemed to be the country or territory where the good underwent its last, substantial, economically justified processing or working, in an undertaking equipped for that purpose, resulting in the manufacture of a new product or representing an important stage of manufacture
For details, please refer to the information on rules of origin here: https://ec.europa.eu/taxation_customs/business/calculation-customs-duties/rules-origin_en
https://ec.europa.eu/taxation_customs/business/calculation-customs-duties_en. These pages will be updated with further information, where necessary.
The European Commission Directorate-General Taxation and Customs Union also provides
dedicated internet site with information and advices on how business
operators can prepare for the withdrawal of the United Kingdom f
m the Union in case of no-deal: https://ec.europa.eu/taxation_customs/uk_withdrawal_en
European Commission
Directorate
eneral Taxation and Customs Union
Directorate-General Trade
EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL TAXATION AND CUSTOMS UNION Brussels, 28 June 2019
OTICE TO STAKEHOLDER
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND EU RULES ON THE EXPORT OF CULTURAL GOODS The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union (TEU)
Following
request by the United Kingdom, the European Council (Article 50) agreed on 11 April 2019
to extend further
the period provided for in Article 50(3) TEU until 31 October 2019.
This means that the United Kingdom will be, as of 1 November 2019
a third country

Preparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for EU and national authorities but also for private parties. In view of the uncertainties surrounding the ratification of the Withdrawal Agreement, all interested parties, and especially economic operators, are reminded of legal repercussions, which need to be considered when the United Kingdom becomes a third country
Subject to the transition period provided for in the Withdrawal Agreement,
as of the withdrawal date
the EU rules on export of cultural goods, and in particular Council
European Council Decision (EU) 2019/584, OJ L 101, 11.4.2019, p. 1.
Following a request by the United Kingdom, the European Council had decided a first extension on 22 March 2019 (European Council Decision (EU) 2019/476, OJ L 80 I, 22.3.2019, p. 1).
On 11 April 2019, following a second request for an extension by the United Kingdom, the European Council also decided that the decision to extend until 31 October 2019 would cease to apply on 31 May 2019 if the United Kingdom had not held elections to the European Parliament and had not ratified the Withdrawal Agreement by 22 May 2019. As the United Kingdom had not ratified the Withdrawal Agreement by 22 May 2019, it held European elections on 23 May 2019.
A third country is a country not member of the EU.
In addition, if the Withdrawal Agreement is ratified by both parties before that date, the withdrawal takes place on the first day of the month following the completion of the ratification procedures.
Cf. Part four of the Agreement on the withdrawal of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland from the European Union and the European Atomic Energy Community (OJ C 144 I, 25
.2019, p. 1

Regulation (EC) No 116/2009 of 18 December 2008 on the export of cultural goods,
no longer apply in the United Kingdom. This has in particular the following consequences
9 1.
ICENCES FOR EXPORTS TO THE
NITED KINGDOM According to Article 2(1) of Regulation (EC) No 116/2009, the export of certain cultural goods10 is subject to an export licence. As of the withdrawal date, where such cultural goods leave the EU-27 customs territory to the United Kingdom, the Channel Islands, or the Isle of Man, these exports are subject to the export licence requirement.11 2.
ICENCES FOR EXPORTS TO OTHER THIRD COUNTRIES According to Article 2(2) of Regulation (EC) No 116/2009, the export licence shall be issued
by a competent authority of the Member State in whose territory the cultural object was lawfully and definitely located on 1 January 1993; or
thereafter, by a competent authority of the Member State in whose territory it is located following either lawful and definitive dispatch from another Member State, or importation from a third country, or reimportation from a third country after lawful dispatch from a Member State to that country
According to Article 2(
of Regulation (EC) No 116/2009, export licences are valid throughout the Union
As of the withdrawal date, export licences issued by the United Kingdom as an EU Member State on the basis of Union law are no longer valid for shipments of
OJ L 39, 10.2.2009, p. 1
8
Regarding more generally the notifications of export and imports, see also the "Notice to stakeholders
Withdrawal of the United Kingdom and EU rules in the field of import/export licences for certain goods" (https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness_en).
Please note that, in addition, as of 28 December 2020 EU law provides for the prohibition of  importing in the Union cultural goods  as defined in Article 1 of the 1970 UNESCO Convention  that were illegally exported from third countries (Article 3(1) of Regulation (EU) 2019/880 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 17 April 2019 on the introduction and the import of cultural goods, OJ L 151, 7.6.2019, p.
). The import of certain cultural good
will also be  subject to an import licence or to an importer statement (affidavit) at the latest from 28 June 202
(Articles 3(2) and 16(2)(b) of Regulation (EU) 2019/880). 10
For example, furniture more than 50 years old or books more than 100 years old and with a value of more than EUR 50.000, printed maps more than 200 years old and with a value of more than EUR 15.000; see Annex I to Regulation (EC) No 116/2009.  11
otice on travelling between the EU and the United Kingdom following withdrawal of the United Kingdom from the EU(https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/file_import/travelling_en.pdf).
3 cultural goods from an EU-27 Member State to a third country.12 Where this leads to the re-issuance by a competent authority of an EU-27 Member State of an export licence previously issued by the competent authority of the United Kingdom, this re-issuance can take account of that previous licence. The website of the Commission on EU rules for export of cultural goods (https://ec.europa.eu/taxation_customs/business/customs-controls/cultural-goods_en) provide
general information. These pages will be updated with further information, where necessary.
European Commission
Directorate
eneral Taxation and Customs Union
12
Notice to stakeholders
Withdrawal of the United Kingdom and EU rules in the field of import/export licences for certain goods
https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/file_import/import_and_export_licences_en.pdf

EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL TAXATION AND CUSTOMS UNION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL TRADE DIRECTORATE-GENERAL FOR AGRICULTURE AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT DIRECTORATE-GENERAL FOR MARITIME AFFAIRS AND FISHERIES

Brussels, 11 July 2019
OTICE TO STAKEHOLDERS
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND EU RULES IN THE FIELD OF TARIFF RATE QUOTAS The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union (TEU). Following
request by the United Kingdom, the European Council (Article 50) agreed on 11 April 2019
to extend further
the period provided for in Article 50(3) TEU until 31 October 2019.
This means that the United Kingdom will be, as of 1 November 2019
5 Preparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for EU and national authorities but also for private parties. In view of the uncertainties surrounding the ratification of the Withdrawal Agreement
all interested parties, and especially economic operators, are reminded of legal repercussions, which need to be considered when the United Kingdom becomes a third country

European Council Decision (EU) 2019/584, OJ L 101, 11.4.2019, p. 1.
Following a request by the United Kingdom, the European Council had decided a first extension on 22 March 2019 (European Council Decision (EU) 2019/476, OJ L 80 I, 22.3.2019, p. 1).
On 11 April 2019, following a second request for an extension by the United Kingdom, the European Council also decided that the decision to extend until 31 October 2019 would cease to apply on 31 May 2019 if the United Kingdom had not held elections to the European Parliament and had not ratified the Withdrawal Agreement by 22 May 2019. As the United Kingdom had not ratified the Withdrawal Agreement by 22 May 2019, it held European elections on 23 May 2019.
A third country is a country not member of the EU.
In addition, if the Withdrawal Agreement is ratified by both parties before that date, the withdrawal takes place on the first day of the month following the completion of the ratification procedures.
Agreement on the withdrawal of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland from the European Union and the European Atomic Energy Community, OJ C 144 I, 25
.2019, p. 1

Subject to the transition period provided for in the Withdrawal Agreement,
as of the withdrawal date the EU rules on tariff rate quota no longer apply in the United Kingdom.  This has in particular the following consequences:
Please note: As part of the preparation for the withdrawal of the United Kingdom, the EU has taken measures to ensure the apportionment of tariff rate quota
included in the WTO schedule of the EU, whether or not the United Kingdom leaves the EU in an orderly manner, through the procedure under Article XXVIII of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) in the WTO and EU legal acts
1.
ARIFF RATE QUOTAS Certain agricultural products, processed agricultural products, industrial products and fishery products are eligible for reduced rates of duty under EU tariff rate quotas, on the basis of
the WTO schedules of the EU (WTO tariff rate quotas
10
tariff rate quotas11 or
autonomous tariff rate quotas.12
It is recalled that, in order for the transition period to apply, the Withdrawal Agreement has to be ratified by the EU and the United Kingdom
8
Where relevant, this notice also addresses origin derogation quotas for imports into the EU and  principle
9
Regulation (EU) 2019/216 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 30 January 2019 on the apportionment of tariff rate quotas included in the WTO schedule of the Union following the withdrawal of the United Kingdom from the Union and amending Council Regulation (EC) No 32/2000, OJ
38, 8.2.2019, p.1; Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2019/386 of 11 March 2019 laying down rules with regard to the apportionment of tariff rate quotas for certain agricultural products included in the WTO schedule of the Union following the withdrawal of the United Kingdom from the Union and with regard to import licences issued and import rights allocated under those tariff rate quotas, OJ L 70, 12.3.2019, p. 4;  Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2019/653 of 24 April 2019 amending Regulation (EC) No 847/2006 as regards the Union tariff quotas for certain prepared or preserved fish, OJ L 110, 25.4.2019, p. 34
10   Council Regulation (EC) No 32/2000 of 17 December 1999 opening and providing for the administration of Community tariff quotas bound in GATT and certain other Community tariff quotas and establishing detailed rules for adjusting the quotas, OJ L 5, 8.1.2000, p. 1. 11
For example, with regard to Canada, Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2017/1586 of 19 September 2017 amending Regulation (EC) No 1067/2008 opening and providing for the administration of Community tariff quotas for common wheat of a quality other than high quality from third countries and derogating from Council Regulation (EC) No 1234/2007, OJ L 241, 20.9.2017,
12. 12
Council Regulation (EU) No 1388/2013 of 17 December 2013 opening and providing for the management of autonomous tariff quotas of the Union for certain agricultural and industrial products, OJ L 354, 28.12.2013, p. 319 and Council Regulation (EU) 2018/1977 of 11 December 2018 opening and providing for the management of autonomous tariff quotas of the Union for certain fishery products for the period 20192020, OJ L 317, 14.12.2018, p. 2.
3
here are two different management approaches of EU tariff rate quotasrst come first servedimport licences and import rights (see below, section 3).13 The latter is currently exclusively used for tariff rate quotas of certain agricultural products. Moreover, for the export of certain products, in some cases the EU manages, tariff rate quota of third countries by way of export licences (see below, section 4). 2. IRST COME FIRST SERV
MANAGEMENT OF EU TARIFF RATE QUOTAS14 According to Article 50 of Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2015/2447,15 customs authorities shall examine whether a request to benefit from a tariff rate quota made by the declarant in a customs declaration for release for free circulation is valid in accordance with the EU legislation opening the tariff rate quota. Where the request is accepted, customs authorities transmit it to the Commission
which allocates the quantity in accordance with Article 51 of that Regulation
Requests by operators to benefit from EU tariff rate quotas which are based on declarations that have been accepted by the UK customs authorities prior to the withdrawal date are eligible where the required supporting documents have been provided to the UK customs authorities prior to that date. Declarations accepted by the UK customs authorities as of the withdrawal date are not eligible to benefit from EU tariff rate quotas. 3.
ANAGEMENT OF EU IMPORT TARIFF RATE QUOTAS WITH IMPORT LICENCES AND IMPORT RIGHTS16
ome EU tariff rate quota
for agricultural products17 are administered on the basis of a licence issued by a Member State18 in accordance with the rules laid down in the relevant Commission acts.                                                  13
Guidance note
ithdrawal of the United Kingdom and customs related matters in case of no dealhttps://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness/preparedness-notices_en#tradetaxud).  14
This section is also relevant for origin derogation quotas for imports into the EU and exports under  15
Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2015/2447 of 24 November 2015 laying down detailed rules for implementing certain provisions of Regulation (EU) No 952/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council laying down the Union Customs Code, OJ L 343, 29.12.2015, p. 558. 16
See also https://ec.europa.eu/info/food-farming-fisheries/farming/eu-agriculture-and-brexit_en
17
For example, as regards bilateral tariff quotas, see Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2015/2079 of 18 November 2015 opening and providing for the administration of a Union import tariff quota for fresh and frozen beef and veal originating in Ukraine, OJ L 302, 19.11.2015, p. 71.
18
See Article 184(2) of Regulation (EU) No 1308/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 17 December 2013 establishing a common organisation of the markets in agricultural products
OJ
347, 20.12.2013, p. 671
and Article 2 of Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2016/1237 of 18 May 2016 supplementing Regulation (EU) No 1308/2013 of the European Parliament and of the
4 3.1. Import licences Applicants have to submit their import licence application to the competent authorities of the Member State where they are established and where they are registered for VAT purposes.19 According to Article 176(3) of Regulation (EU) No 1308/2013, a licence issued by a particular Member State is valid for the importation of the products anywhere within the EU customs territory
For licence-managed EU tariff rate quotas, the rights and obligations that arise from UK agricultural licences allocated by the licensing issuing authorities of the United Kingdom will cease to be valid in the EU-27 as of the withdrawal date.20 As of that date, EU-27 customs administrations shall no longer accept those licences. Licences issued by EU-27 licensing authorities will remain valid within the EU-27.21 Stakeholders concerned, in particular transferees of licences (see below, section 3.3) should take this into account. 3.2. Securities According to Article 4 of Delegated Regulation (EU) 2016/1237, some licenses are subject to a security to be lodged with the Member State authority that issued the licence. This security is released upon importation, subject to the rules set out in Article 7 of Delegated Regulation (EU) 2016/1237. As of the withdrawal date, EU law on the release of the security no longer applies to the United Kingdom.  Stakeholders concerned should take this into account, for example by seeking confirmation that securities paid will be released by the United Kingdom as of the withdrawal date. 3.3. Transfer of licences According to Article 6 of Delegated Regulation (EU) 2016/1237 it is possible, under certain circumstances, to transfer the rights deriving from a licence to a                                                                                                                                                  Council with regard to the rules for applying the system of import and export licences and supplementing Regulation (EU) No 1306/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council with regard to the rules on the release and forfeit of securities lodged for such licences, OJ L 206, 30.7.2016, p. 1
19
Article 5 of Commission Regulation (EC) No 1301/2006 of 31 August 2006 laying down common rules for the administration of import tariff quotas for agricultural products managed by a system of import licences
OJ L 238, 1.9.2006, p.13
20
This also applies where the issuing of a liceimport rightsArticle 6(3) of Regulation (EC) No 1301/2006). See, for example, Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) No 1223/2012 of 18 December 2012 laying down detailed rules for the application of an import tariff quota for live bovine animals of a weight exceeding 160 kg and originating in Switzerland provided for in the Agreement between the European Community and the Swiss Confederation on trade in agricultural products, OJ L 349, 19.12.2012, p. 39. 21
See, however, in the case of transfers, section 3.3. below.
5 transferee. This is done by virtue of a request by the titular holder to the licence issuing authority which issued the original licence. According to Article 2 of Implementing Regulation (EU) 2019/386 a licence under a tariff rate quota referred to in Annexes I and II to that Regulation and transferred to operators established in the United Kingdom shall expire in the EU-27 as of the withdrawal date. 4.
XPORT LICENCES In order to administer certain tariff rate quotas available for EU exporters to third countries, EU law, based on international agreements, provides for a system of EU ional administrations to exporters wishing to benefit from the tariff rate quota in questi
.22 23
n export licence issued by the United Kingdom will cease to be valid where the export of the consignment is effected or ensured as of the withdrawal date.24 Moreover, export licences may be subject to a security to be paid. In this case, section 3.4. of this notice applies, i.e. as of the withdrawal date, EU law on the release of the security no longer applies to the United Kingdom. Stakeholders concerned should take this into account when choosing the Member State that issues the licence.
The website
of the Commission on tariff rate quota
(https://ec.europa.eu/agriculture/tariff-rate-quotas-trqs_en, https://ec.europa.eu/info/food-farming-fisheries/farming/eu-agriculture-and-brexit_en and https://ec.europa.eu/taxation_customs/business/calculation-customs-duties/what-is-common-customs-tariff/tariff-quotas_en) provide general information concerning EU legislation on tariff rate quotas. These pages will be updated with further information, where necessary.
European Commission
Directorate-General Taxation and Customs Union
Directorate-General Trade
22
For example, Commission Regulation (EC) No 1187/2009 of 27 November 2009 laying down special detailed rules for the application of Council Regulation (EC) No 1234/2007 as regards export licences and export refunds for milk and milk products, OJ L 318, 4.12.2009, p. 1; Commission Regulation (EC) No 2307/98 of 26 October 1998 on the issue of export licences for dog and cat food falling within CN code 2309 10 90 qualifying for special import treatment in Switzerland, OJ L 288, 27.10.1998, p. 8.  23
Export licences for milk and milk products are not transferable,  see for example Article 32(5) of Regulation (EC) No 1187/2009. 24
See also, with regard to proofs of origin made out in the United Kingdom, section 5.2.b of the Guidance note
ithdrawal of the United Kingdom and customs related matters in case of no deal(https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness/preparedness-notices_en#tradetaxud).
6 Directorate-General for Agriculture and Rural Development
Directorate-General for Maritime Affairs and Fisheries
EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL TAXATION AND CUSTOMS UNION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL MIGRATION AND HOME AFFAIRS DIRECTORATE-GENERAL FOR HEALTH AND FOOD SAFETY DIRECTORATE-GENERAL FOR MOBILITY AND TRANSPORT DIRECTORATE-GENERAL FOR COMMUNICATIONS NETWORKS, CONTENT AND TECHNOLOGY DIRECTORATE-GENERAL FOR FINANCIAL STABILITY, FINANCIAL SERVICES  AND CAPITAL MARKETS UNION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL EMPLOYMENT, SOCIAL AFFAIRS AND INCLUSION
DIRECTORATE-GENERAL JUSTICE AND CONSUMERS DIRECTORATE-GENERAL FOR ENVIRONMENT DIRECTORATE-GENERAL FOR INTERNAL MARKET, INDUSTRY, ENTREPRENEURSHIP AND SMES
Brussels, 22 July 201
REV2  replaces the notices REV1 published on 13 November 2018
NOTICE ON TRAVELLING BETWEEN THE EU AND THE UNITED
INGDOM FOLLOWING WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM FROM THE EU TABLE OF CONTENTS 1. INTRODUCTION .......................................................................................................
2. BORDER CHECKS ON PERSONS AT THE EU EXTERNAL BORDER,  AIRPORT TRANSIT VISA ........................................................................................
2.1. Entry and exit checks .........................................................................................
2.2. Airport transit visa .............................................................................................
3. CUSTOMS CONTROLS ............................................................................................
4. DUTIES, VAT AND EXCISE ....................................................................................
4.1. Exemption from duties, VAT and excise ..........................................................
4.2. VAT refunds for goods purchased in the EU ....................................................
5. PROHIBITIONS AND RESTRICTIONS ................................................................ 10 5.1. Accompanying pets ......................................................................................... 10 5.1.1. Non-commercial movements into the EU-27 of pets accompanying a pet owner resident in the United Kingdom............. 11 5.1.1.1. If the United Kingdom is listed by the Commission in accordance with Article 13(1) of Regulation (EU) No 576/2013 ............................................................. 11 5.1.1.2. If the United Kingdom is listed by the Commission in accordance with Article 13(2) of Regulation (EU) No 576/2013 ............................................................. 12
Main change is a new section 2.2. on airport transit visa.
2 5.1.1.3. If the United Kingdom is not listed by the Commission ....................................................................... 12 5.1.2. Non-commercial movements into the EU-27 of pets accompanying a pet owner resident in an EU-27 Member State and returning from the United Kingdom after a temporary movement to the United Kingdom ................................... 13 5.1.2.1. If the United Kingdom is listed by the Commission in accordance with Article 13(1) of Regulation (EU) No 576/2013 ............................................................. 13 5.1.2.2. If the United Kingdom is listed by the Commission in accordance with Article 13(2) of Regulation (EU) No 576/2013 ............................................................. 13 5.1.2.3. If the United Kingdom is not listed by the Commission ....................................................................... 14 5.2. Plants and plant products ................................................................................. 14 5.3. Personal consignments of products of animal origin ...................................... 15 5.4. Cash ................................................................................................................. 16 5.5. Cultural goods ................................................................................................
16 5.6. Specimens of endangered species ................................................................... 16 5.7. Invasive alien species ...................................................................................... 18 5.8. Firearms ........................................................................................................... 19 6. USE OF AUTOMOTIVE VEHICLES ..................................................................... 20 6.1. Driving licences ............................................................................................... 20 6.2. Third party liability insurance ......................................................................... 21 7. MEDICAL TREATMENT AND RELATED ISSUES; EMERGENCIES .............. 22 7.1. Entitlement of healthcare under Union law on social security coordination ..................................................................................................... 22 7.2. Entitlement of re-imbursement for cross-border healthcare under Union law on cross-border healthcare ............................................................. 23 7.3. Recognition of medical prescriptions issued in another Member State .......... 23 7.4. European emergency number  112 ................................................................ 24 7.5. Parking cards for disabled ............................................................................... 24 7.6. Consular protection ......................................................................................... 25 7.7. Compensation mechanism for persons injured by a car in another Member State ("visiting victims") ................................................................... 25 8. INSURANCE, PASSENGER RIGHTS .................................................................... 26 8.1. Insolvency travel insurance ............................................................................. 26 8.2. EU passenger rights ......................................................................................... 26 8.2.1. Air passenger rights ........................................................................... 27
3 8.2.2. Ship passengers rights ....................................................................... 27 8.2.3. Bus and coach passenger rights ......................................................... 28 8.2.4. Rail passengers rights ........................................................................ 28 9. OTHER ISSUES ....................................................................................................... 29 9.1. Card payments ................................................................................................
29 9.2. Roaming .......................................................................................................... 29 9.3. Portability of online content services .............................................................. 30 ANNEX: EU-LEAFLET ON PERSONAL CONSIGNMENTS OF PRODUCTS OF ANIMAL ORIGIN THAT FORM PART OF TRAVELLERS' LUGGAGE ................................................................................................................ 31

4
1.
NTRODUCTION The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. Following
request by the United Kingdom, the European Council (Article 50) agreed on 11 April 2019
to extend further
the period provided for in Article 50(3) TEU until 31 October 2019.
This means that the United Kingdom will be, as of 1 a third country

Preparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for EU and national administrations but also for private parties. In view of the uncertainties surrounding the ratification of the Withdrawal Agreement
persons who plan to travel (for private or business reasons) from the United Kingdom to the EU (and vice-versa) on the withdrawal date or thereafter, and businesses providing services in relation to such travel (travel organisers, travel agencies, car rental companies, trade fairs
transport companies, etc.) are reminded of the legal repercussions, which need to be considered when the United Kingdom becom
a third country
Subject to the transition period provided for in the Withdrawal Agreement,
as of the withdrawal date, the withdrawal of the United Kingdom has the following consequences for travellers from the United Kingdom to the EU and vice-versa:

European Council Decision (EU) 2019/584, OJ L 101, 11.4.2019, p. 1.
Following a request by the United Kingdom, the European Council had decided a first extension on 22 March 2019 (European Council Decision (EU) 2019/476, OJ L 80I, 22.3.2019, p. 1).
On 11 April 2019, following a second request for an extension by the United Kingdom, the European Council also decided that the decision to extend until 31 October 2019 would cease to apply on 31 May 2019 if the United Kingdom had not held elections to the European Parliament and had not ratified the Withdrawal Agreement by 22 May 2019. As the United Kingdom had not ratified the Withdrawal Agreement by 22 May 2019, it held European elections on 23 May 2019.
A third country is a country not member of the EU.
In addition, if the Withdrawal Agreement is ratified by both parties before that date, the withdrawal takes place on the first day of the month following the completion of the ratification procedures.
Agreement on the withdrawal of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland from the European Union and the European Atomic Energy Community, OJ, C 144 I, 25
.2019, p. 1
8
It is recalled that, in order for the transition period to apply, the Withdrawal Agreement has to be ratified by the EU and the United Kingdom
9
It is recalled that the Withdrawal Agreement between the EU and the United Kingdom would provide for specific solutions addressing the unique circumstances on the island of Ireland.
5 2.
ORDER CHECKS ON PERSONS AT THE EU EXTERNAL BORDER,10 11 AIRPORT TRANSIT VISA 2.1. Entry and exit checks Union law12 on border checks at the EU external borders on persons distinguishes between controls of EU citizens and of third country nationals. As of the withdrawal date, controls of UK nationals upon entry to and exit from the Schengen area as well as to and from Member States for which the decision on lifting internal controls has not been taken yet but which apply Schengen rules at their external borders13 will follow the rules for third country nationals.14 15 This means that they will no longer enjoy facilitations at the borders provided for EU citizens, nationals of the contracting states of the European Economic Area, and Swiss nationals ("EU/EEA/CH citizens") related to the free movement rights. In particular, UK nationals will not be entitled to use the separate lanes provided for EU/EEA/CH citizens to carry out checks at border crossings16 and will be subject to thorough checks of all entry conditions for third country nationals upon entry.
The entry checks on UK nationals will include verification of:17
the possession of a valid travel document for crossing the border; the document needs to have a validity of no more than ten years, and shall be still valid for three months after the intended departure from the Member States
Please note that UK national passports issued prior to the withdrawal date remain valid travel documents.                                                  10
For more information, please consult https://ec.europa.eu/home-affairs/what-we-do/policies/borders-and-visas/border-crossing_en
11
This section does not apply for travels in the Common Travel Area between the United Kingdom and Ireland. 12
Article 8(2) and (3) of Regulation (EU) 2016/399 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 9 March 2016 on a Union Code on the rules governing the movement of persons across borders (Schengen Borders Code), OJ L 77, 23.3.2016, p. 1
13
Romania, Bulgaria, Cyprus, and Croatia. 14
Please note that UK nationals who are members of the family of a Union citizen exercising his or her right to free movement are subject to the rules set out in Article 5 of Directive 2004/38/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 29 April 2004 on the right of citizens of the Union and their family members to move and reside freely within the territory of the Member States
OJ L 158, 30.4.2004, p. 77
15
It should be noted that parts of these controls do already apply today, to citizens from the United Kingdom, when traveling into or out of the Schengen area. 16
Article 10 of Regulation (EU) 2016/399
17
Article 6 of Regulation (EU) 2016/399.
6
the duration of the stay:
for short stays in the Schengen area, UK nationals will be subject to limitations as regards the authorised duration of stay within the Schengen area (with a maximum of 90 days in a 180-day period)
- for long stays, they will in principle require a residence permit or long stay visa issued by national authorities, under the national rules
- relevant databases with a view to verify:18
the identity and the nationality of the third-country national and of the authenticity and validity of the travel document for crossing the border, and in particular


if an alert has been issued in the Schengen Information System (SIS) for the purposes of refusing entry and to check possible threats to public policy, internal security, public health and international relations;
the purpose (e.g. tourism or work) and the conditions of the intended stay (e.g. accommodation, internal travels)

the existence of sufficient means of subsistence (i.e. having sufficient means to pay for the intended stay and return travel). The EU has exempted, as part of its Brexit contingency actions, UK nationals from the requirement to be in possession of a short-ngen-19 when crossing the external borders, where the intended duration of the stay in the Schengen area is 90 days within a 180-day period.20 A continued exemption from Schengen visa will require that nationals of all EU Member States are equally exempted from UK short-stay visa requirements, following the visa reciprocity principle.                                                  18
Please note that the possibility of a temporary derogation from the principle, subject to some conditions, of the systematic checks against relevant databases at some land and sea border crossing points does not apply to third country nationals (Article 8(2) of Regulation (EU) 2016/399). 19
Article 6(1)(b) of Regulation (EU) 2016/399. 20
Regulation (EU) 2019/592 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 10 April 2019 amending Regulation (EU) 2018/1806 listing the third countries whose nationals must be in possession of visas when crossing the external borders and those whose nationals are exempt from that requirement, as regards the withdrawal of the United Kingdom from the Union, OJ L 103I , 12.4.2019, p. 1

Travellers are advised to verify, prior to travel, the validity of travel documents and to ensure that they fulfil all the above conditions before they travel to the EU
The non-fulfilment of any of the entry conditions may result21 in refusal of entry issued in line with the procedure set out in Union law with regard to third country nationals.22 Checks on exit include verification of:
the possession of a valid travel document for crossing the external border
- verification that the person did not exceed the maximum duration of stay in the territory of the Member States
- relevant databases similarly as upon entry checks
Travellers are advised to take account of possible delays at border posts as of the withdrawal date, especially at those with heavy volumes of traffic (Eurostar train stations, Eurotunnel Le Shuttle in Calais and Folkestone, Channel ports, etc). 2.2. Airport transit visa23 Union law on visas24 requires certain third country nationals25 to hold an Airport Transit Visa when passing through the international transit areas of airports situated in the EU (with the exception of Ireland and the United Kingdom) and the Schengen Associated Countries (Iceland, Liechtenstein26, Norway and Switzerland) without entering the territory of these countries. For example, this applies to a journey between two non-EU/non-Schengen destinations with a change of plane at an airport located in the EU (except Ireland and the United Kingdom) or in the Schengen Associated Countries
The requirement for an Airport Transit Visa applies to these third country nationals passing through the international transit areas of airport
located in the EU (except Ireland) or in the Schengen Associated Countries when travelling from a third country to the United Kingdom and vice-versa. The Visa Code sets out some exceptions to this requirement, for example for third                                                  21
Regulation (EU) 2016/399 provides for some limited exceptions, where despite the non-fulfilment of entry conditions the third country national can be granted entry. 22
Article 14 of Regulation (EU) 2016/399. 23
For more information, please consult https://ec.europa.eu/home-affairs/what-we-do/policies/borders-and-visas/visa-policy/apply_for_a_visa_en.  24
Article 3 of Regulation (EC) No 810/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 July 2009 establishing a Community Code on Visas (Visa Code), OJ L 243, 15.9.2009, p. 1
25
Annex IV of Regulation (EC) No 810/2009  Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Ghana, Iran, Iraq, Nigeria, Pakistan, Somalia and Sri Lanka. Under the Visa Code Member States may also introduce national airport transit visa requirements. For more information, please consult https://ec.europa.eu/home-affairs/sites/homeaffairs/files/annex_7b_atv-national_lists_en.pdf.
26
Liechtenstein does not have an airport.
8 country nationals holding a valid visa or residence permit issued by a Member State, holders of diplomatic passports, and holders of a valid visa or residence permit for certain third countries (e.g. Canada, Japan and the United States). As of the withdrawal date, a valid residence permit or visa issued by the United Kingdom does not exempt thes
third country national
from the requirement to hold an Airport Transit Visa. Nationals concerned who pass through international transit areas of airport
situated in the EU27 Member States (with the exception of Ireland) and the Schengen Associated Countries (Iceland, Norway and Switzerland
when travelling between the United Kingdom and another third country as of the withdrawal date are advised to apply for an Airport Transit Visa and to take the necessary steps sufficiently in advance of their travel. 3.
USTOMS CONTROLS As of the withdrawal date, goods which are brought into the customs territory of the EU from the United Kingdom are subject to customs supervision and may be subject to customs controls in accordance with EU customs law.27 28 Luggage and other goods carried by or on travellers entering the EU from the United Kingdom will be subject to customs controls.29 Allowances are made for rtain other items (see section 4.1 below). In particular, goods which are intended to be put on the EU market or intended for private use or consumption within the customs territory of the EU must be declared for release for free circulation. Further information is available at: https://ec.europa.eu/taxation_customs/individuals/travelling/travelling-europe-what-dohave-know_en Goods which are temporarily imported may be declared for the temporary admission procedure. To this end, ATA Carnets may be used. ATA Carnets are international customs documents permitting the duty-free and tax-free temporary export and import of goods for up to one year. Additional information is available at: https://iccwbo.org/resources-for-business/ata-carnet/                                                  27
Regulation (EU) No 952/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 9 October 2013 laying down the Union Customs Code, OJ L 269, 10.10.2013, p. 1. 28
The rules set out in this section will apply also to goods brought into the customs territory of the EU from the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man
Article 4(1) last indent of Regulation (EU) No 952/2013). 29
Article 46(1) of Regulation (EU) No 952/2013

4.
UTIES
VAT AND EXCISE30 4.1. Exemption from duties, VAT and excise Travellers entering the EU from the United Kingdom carrying goods in their luggage or otherwise with them are entitled to duty free allowances (meaning goods exempt from import duty and VAT, and where applicable excise duty)
The goods concerned and the corresponding allowances can be found at: https://ec.europa.eu/taxation_customs/individuals/travelling/entering-eu_en Travellers are advised to familiarise themselves with the rules concerning duty free allowances and only go through the green customs exit ("green channel") if they have no more than the maximum quantities allowed. Otherwise they should use the red exit ("red channel") and make a customs declaration. 4.2. VAT refunds for goods purchased in the EU31 Visitors from outside the EU are entitled to get a refund of VAT paid on goods they have purchased during their stay in the EU provided that the goods are presented to customs on departure from the EU together with the VAT refund documents. Guide to VAT refund for visitors to the EU                                                  30
Regarding customs duties, the rules set out in this  section will apply, as of the withdrawal date, also to goods brought into the customs territory of the EU from the Isle of Man and the Channel Islands
Article 4(1) last indent of Regulation (EU) No 952/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 9 October 2013 laying down the Union Customs Code, OJ L 269, 10.10.2013, p. 1).  Regarding VAT, the rules set out in this section will apply, as of the withdrawal date, also to goods brought into the VAT territory of the EU from the Isle of Man and vice-versa (Article 7(2) of Council Directive 2006/112/EC of 28 November 2006 on the common system of value added tax OJ L 347, 11.12.2006, p. 1) (The Channel Islands are, already today, not part of the EU VAT territory, Article 6(1)(e) of Directive 2006/112/EC)
Regarding excise, the rules set out in this section will apply, as of the withdrawal date, also to goods brought into the excise territory of the EU from the Isle of Man
Article 6(2)(d) of Council Directive 2008/118/EC of 16 December 2008 concerning the general arrangements for excise duty, OJ L 9, 14.1.2009, p. 12) (The Channel Islands are, already today, not part of the EU excise territory, Article 5(2)(d) of Directive 2008/118/EC). 31
In the context of the negotiations of the EU-UK withdrawal agreement, the EU is trying to agree solutions with the United Kingdom to ensure the refund of VAT in relation to transactions prior to the end of the transition period in situations where the refund request could not be submitted by the taxable person or forwarded by his residence State before the end of the transition period. See, in particular, the latest text of the draft withdrawal agreement agreed at negotiator's level, which is available here: https://ec.europa.eu/commission/sites/beta-political/files/draft_agreement_coloured.pdf and the "joint statement" from the negotiators of the EU and of the United Kingdom Government presented on 19 June 2018 (https://ec.europa.eu/commission/brexit-negotiations/negotiating-documents-article-50-negotiations-united-kingdom_en).
10 5.
ROHIBITIONS AND RESTRICTIONS EU law prohibits and restricts the introduction or importation of certain goods into the EU on grounds of inter alia the protection of human, animal and plant health , the environment or the protection of national treasures. As of the withdrawal date, these prohibitions and restrictions will apply to goods which enter the EU from the United Kingdom or are leaving the EU to the United Kingdom.32 While most prohibitions and restrictions de jure or in practice are only relevant for professional traders,33 some are also relevant for individual travellers: 5.1. Accompanying pets34
Union law35 sets rules for the non-commercial movement of pet dogs, cats and ferrets (hereafter "pets")36 that accompany travellers coming from third countries.37 38                                                  32
In the context of the negotiations of the EU-UK withdrawal agreement, the EU is trying to agree solutions with the United Kingdom for movement
of goods that have started before and end after the end of the transition period ("sailing goods"). See, in particular, the latest text of the draft withdrawal agreement agreed at negotiator's level, which is available here: https://ec.europa.eu/commission/sites/beta-political/files/draft_agreement_coloured.pdf and the "joint statement" from the negotiators of the EU and of the United Kingdom Government presented on 19 June 2018 (https://ec.europa.eu/commission/brexit-negotiations/negotiating-documents-article-50-negotiations-united-kingdom_en).
33
For example, the prohibitions and restrictions for waste, or certain chemicals (see, for more information, the "Notice to stakeholders
Withdrawal of the United Kingdom and EU rules in the field of import/export licences for certain goods" at https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness_en). 34
For more information, please consult https://ec.europa.eu/food/animals/pet-movement_en
35
Regulation (EU) No 576/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 June 2013 on the non-commercial movement of pet animals, OJ L 178, 28.6.2013, p. 1. 36
Please note that, currently, live pet birds accompanying travellers entering the EU have to be accompanied by a veterinary certificate certifying compliance with one of the following requirements: a 30-days isolation prior to departure in the third country, or a 10-day isolation period with testing for avian influenza, or a post import quarantine in the Member State of destination or vaccination against avian influenza. (Commission Decision 2007/25/EC of 22 December 2006 as regards certain protection measures in relation to highly pathogenic avian influenza and movements of pet birds accompanying their owners into the Community (OJ L 8, 13.1.2007, p. 29)).
In addition, regarding live pet birds, requirements for introducing specimens of endangered species may apply (see below, section 5.6
37
In the context of the negotiations of the EU-UK withdrawal agreement, the EU is trying to agree solutions with the United Kingdom for live animals the movement of which is ongoing at the end of the transition period. See, in particular, the latest text of the draft withdrawal agreement agreed at negotiator's level, which is available here: https://ec.europa.eu/commission/sites/beta-political/files/draft_agreement_coloured.pdf and the "joint statement" from the negotiators of the EU and of the United Kingdom Government presented on 19 June 2018 (https://ec.europa.eu/commission/brexit-negotiations/negotiating-documents-article-50-negotiations-united-kingdom_en).
11 5.1.1. Non-commercial movements into the EU-27 of pets accompanying a pet owner resident in the United Kingdom
he "EU pet passport"39 issued before the withdrawal date to a pet owner resident in the United Kingdom will from that date no longer be a valid document for travelling with pets from the United Kingdom to any of the EU-27 Member States as of the withdrawal date.  The requirements for pets accompanying travellers coming from the United Kingdom as of the withdrawal date will also depend on whether the United Kingdom is "listed", as of that date, as a third country providing certain animal health guarantees. Travellers concerned are advised to enquire, sufficiently in advance of a planned trip from the United Kingdom to the EU, whether the United Kingdom is "listed" in order to establish what requirements apply. The lists adopted by the EU are published here: https://ec.europa.eu/food/animals/pet-movement/eu-legislation/non-commercial-non-eu/listing_en.  5.1.1.1. If the United Kingdom is listed by the Commission in accordance with Article 13(1) of Regulation (EU) No 576/201340
Pets moved into the EU-27 as of the withdrawal date will have to be accompanied by a duly filled-in third country pet passport, the model of which has been adopted by the Commission.41 This passport must attest a valid anti
abies vaccination.42 43 In addition, prior to entry into Finland, Ireland or Malta, pet dogs will have to be treated against Echinococcus                                                                                                                                                  38
These rules will also apply, as of the withdrawal date, to the non-commercial movement of pets from the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man
Regulation (EEC) No 706/73 of the Council of 12 March 1973 concerning the Community arrangements applicable to the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man for trade in agricultural products, OJ L 68, 15.3.1973, p. 1). 39
Model of pet passport laid down in Part 1 of Annex III to Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) No 577/2013 of 28 June 2013 on the model identification documents for the non-commercial movement of dogs, cats and ferrets, the establishment of lists of territories and third countries and the format, layout and language requirements of the declarations attesting compliance with certain conditions provided for in Regulation (EU) No 576/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council (OJ L 178, 28.6.2013, p. 109). 40
See Part 1 of Annex II to Implementing Regulation (EU) No 577/2013
41
Part 3 of Annex III to Implementing Regulation (EU) No 577/2013
42
Annex III to Regulation (EU) No 576/2013
43
The former EU pet passport issued before the date of withdrawal to a pet owner resident in the United Kingdom after that date may serve as supporting documentation to certify a still valid vaccination.
12 multilocularis and this treatment must be attested by the administering veterinarian in the pet passport.44 5.1.1.2. If the United Kingdom is listed by the Commission in accordance with Article 13(2) of Regulation (EU) No 576/201345 An animal health certificate issued by an official veterinarian will be required for each entry of an accompanying pet and only remains valid for movement within the EU-27 Member States for a period of four months.46  This certificate must attest a valid anti-rabies vaccination.47 48 In addition, prior to entry into Finland, Ireland or Malta, pet dogs will have to be treated against Echinococcus multilocularis and this treatment must be attested by the administering veterinarian in the pet passport.49 Pets entering the EU-27 as of the withdrawal date will have to be presented to a designated travell50 in order to undergo the necessary compliance checks.51 5.1.1.3. If the United Kingdom is not listed by the Commission The same conditions as set out in point 5.1.1.2. apply. However, the certificate referred to in point 5.1.1.2. must also attest a valid rabies antibody titration test.52 The test must have been carried out in an EU-approved laboratory or in a laboratory approved by one of the EU-27 Member                                                  44
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2018/772 of 21 November 2017 supplementing Regulation (EU) No 576/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council with regard to preventive health measures for the control of Echinococcus multilocularis infection in dogs, OJ L 130, 28.5.2018, p. 1
45
See Part 2 of Annex II to Implementing Regulation (EU) No 577/2013
46
Note (b) in Annex IV to Implementing Regulation (EU) No 577/2013. 47
Annex III to Regulation (EU) No 576/2013
48
The former EU pet passport issued before the date of withdrawal to a pet owner resident in the United Kingdom after that date may serve as supporting documentation to certify a still valid vaccination.  49
Delegated Regulation (EU) 2018/772. 50
https://ec.europa.eu/food/animals/pet-movement/eu-legislation/non-commercial-non-eu/tpe_en.  51
Article 34 of Regulation (EU) No 576/2013
52
Annex IV to Regulation (EU) No 576/2013
13 States53 on a sample taken at least 30 days after vaccination and not less than three months before movement. 5.1.2. Non-commercial movements into the EU-27 of pets accompanying a pet owner resident in an EU-27 Member State and returning from the United Kingdom after a temporary movement to the United Kingdom The requirements for pets accompanying travellers coming from the United Kingdom as of the withdrawal date will also depend on whether the United Kingdom is "listed", as of that date, as a third country providing certain animal health guarantees. Travellers concerned are advised to enquire, sufficiently in advance of a planned trip from the United Kingdom to the EU, whether the United Kingdom is "listed" in order to establish what requirements apply. The lists adopted by the EU are published here: https://ec.europa.eu/food/animals/pet-movement/eu-legislation/non-commercial-non-eu/listing_en 5.1.2.1. If the United Kingdom is listed by the Commission in accordance with Article 13(1) of Regulation (EU) No 576/201354 Pets moved into the EU-27 will have to be accompanied by a duly filled-in EU pet passport. This passport must attest a valid anti-rabies vaccination. In addition, prior to entry into Finland, Ireland or Malta, pet dogs will have to be treated against Echinococcus multilocularis and this treatment must be attested by the administering veterinarian in the pet passport.55 5.1.2.2. If the United Kingdom is listed by the Commission in accordance with Article 13(2) of Regulation (EU) No 576/201356 The same conditions as set out in point 5.1.2.1. apply. In addition, pets entering the EU-27 as of the withdrawal date will have to be presented to a designated travellpoint of entry57 in order to undergo the necessary compliance checks.58                                                  53
https://ec.europa.eu/food/animals/pet-movement/approved-labs_en 54
See Part 1 of Annex II to Implementing Regulation (EU) No 577/2013
55
Delegated Regulation (EU) 2018/772
56
See Part 2 of Annex II to Implementing Regulation (EU) No 577/2013
57
https://ec.europa.eu/food/animals/pet-movement/eu-legislation/non-commercial-no
eu/tpe_en.  58
Article 34 of Regulation (EU) No 576/2013
14 5.1.2.3. If the United Kingdom is not listed by the Commission The same conditions as set out in point 5.1.2.1. apply.  In addition, the pets must have a valid rabies antibody titration test in accordance with Annex IV to Regulation (EU) No 576/2013. The test must have been carried out in an approved laboratory59
either before movement to the United Kingdom on a sample taken at least 30 days after vaccination and documented in the pet passport; or
in the United Kingdom on a sample taken at least 30 days after vaccination and not less than three months before return to EU-27 Member States and documented in the animal health certificate issued by an official veterinarian in the United Kingdom based on supporting documentation from the laboratory. Pets entering the EU-27 as of the withdrawal date will have to be presented to a designated travell60 in order to undergo the necessary compliance checks.61 5.2. Plants and plant products62 Union law63 prohibits the introduction into the Union of certain plants, plant products and other objects due to their phytosanitary risk. Examples are grapevine or citrus plants for planting, seed potatoes or soil. These prohibitions also apply where plants, plant products and other objects accompany travellers.64 65                                                  59
Delegated Regulation (EU) 2018/772
60
https://ec.europa.eu/food/animals/pet-movement/eu-legislation/non-commercial-non-eu/tpe_en.  61
Article 34 of Regulation (EU) No 576/2013
62
For more information, please consult https://ec.europa.eu/food/animals/animalproducts/personal_imports_en
63
Article 4 in conjunction with Annex III, Part A of Council Directive 2000/29/EC of 8 May 2000 on protective measures against the introduction into the Community of organisms harmful to plants or plant products and against their spread within the Community, OJ L 169, 10.7.2000, p. 1. 64
Union law also introduces certain requirements for the introduction into the Union of certain plants, plant products or other objects. However those requirements do not apply to small quantities, see Article 5(4) of Directive 2000/29/EC.  65
New EU rules will apply from 14 December 2019. According to these rules, all prohibitions or import requirements for plants and other commodities from third countries  also apply to plants and other commodities accompanying travellers. However, small quantities of certain plants and other commodities may be introduced without a phytosanitary certificate, only if so regulated by a Commission implementing act to be adopted in the future, see Article 75 of Regulation (EU)
15 As of the withdrawal date, these prohibitions apply also vis
-vis the United Kingdom.66 Travellers concerned are advised to enquire, prior to travelling, the precise scope of these prohibitions. 5.3. Personal consignments of products of animal origin67 Union law68 prohibits the introduction into the EU of certain products of animal origin where they form part of travellers' luggage.69 This concerns for example meat and milk and their products like ham and cheese. Exceptions are provided for certain quantities of, for example, powdered infant milk, infant food, and special foods or special processed pet fee
required for medical reasons
As of the withdrawal date, these prohibitions apply also vis
-vis the United Kingdom.70 The Commission has adopted71 a "leaflet" (annexed) that sets out the detailed rules, as well as the exceptions, for example for medical or nutritional purposes.
2016/2031 of the European Parliament of the Council of 26 October 2016 on protective measures against pests of plants
OJ L 317, 23.11.2016, p. 4
66
The rules also apply, as of the withdrawal date, to personal consignments of travellers from the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man (Regulation (EEC) No 706/73 of the Council of 12 March 1973 concerning the Community arrangements applicable to the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man for trade in agricultural products, OJ L 68, 15.3.1973, p. 1). 67
For more information, please consult https://ec.europa.eu/food/animals/animalproducts/personal_imports_en
68
Commission Regulation (EC) No 206/2009 of 5 March 2009 on the introduction into the Community of personal consignments of products of animal origin
OJ L 77, 24.3.2009, p. 1. 69
In this context, while not necessarily directly relevant for travellers, it is recalled that Union law prohibits the importation into the EU of any catering waste from means of transport operating internationally (Articles 8(f) and 41(2)(c) of Regulation (EC) No 1069/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 21 October 2009 laying down health rules as regards animal by-products and derived products not intended for human consumption and repealing Regulation (EC) No 1774/2002 (Animal by-products Regulation), OJ L 300, 14.11.2009, p. 1). Such catering waste has to be disposed of in accordance with 12 of Regulation (EC) No 1069/2009 (e.g. direct incineration), or it has to remain on board of the means of transport and returned to the third country. 70
The rules also apply, as of the withdrawal date, to personal consignments of travellers from the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man
Regulation (EEC) No 706/73 of the Council of 12 March 1973 concerning the Community arrangements applicable to the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man for trade in agricultural products, OJ L 68, 15.3.1973, p. 1). 71
Annex IV to Regulation (EC) No 206/2009
16 5.4. Cash72
Union law requires persons that enter or leave the EU carrying EUR 10 000 or more in cash (or its equivalent in other currencies) or in bearer negotiable instruments (easily convertible assets such as cheques drawn on a third party) to make a declaration to the customs authorities of the Member State in which they are entering or leaving the EU.73 As of the withdrawal date, this obligation applies also vis
-vis the United Kingdom. Customs authorities are empowered under Regulation (EC) No 1889/2005 to undertake controls on individuals, their baggage and their means of transport and detain cash that has not been declared. Travellers must be aware that all Member States of the EU apply penalties in the event of failure to comply with the obligation to declare as laid down in Regulation (EC) No 1889/2005
5.5. Cultural goods74
Union law75 submits the export of certain cultural goods (such as furniture more than 50 years old or books more than 100 years old and with a value of more than EUR 50.000, printed maps more than 200 years old and with a value of more than EUR 15.00076) to an export licence. This requirement also applies to individual travellers. As of the withdrawal date, this obligation applies also vis
-vis the United Kingdom.
ravellers concerned are advise
to enquire whether goods carried in luggage are subject to export licence requirements
5.6. Specimens of endangered species77 Union law78 as a general rule provides that persons travelling to the EU from third countries may introduce specimens of endangered species (animals or                                                  72
For more information, please consult https://ec.europa.eu/taxation_customs/individuals/cash-controls_en
73
Article 3(1) of Regulation (EC) No 1889/2005 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 October 2005 on controls of cash entering or leaving the Community
OJ L 309, 25.11.2005, p. 9
74
For more information, please consult https://ec.europa.eu/taxation_customs/business/customs-controls/cultural-goods_en
75
Article 2(1) of Council Regulation (EC) No 116/2009 of 18 December 2008 on the export of cultural goods, OJ L 39, 10.2.2009, p. 1
76
See Annex I to Regulation (EC) No 116/2009.  77
For more information, please consult http://ec.europa.eu/environment/cites/index_en.htm
17 plants)79 into the EU only subject to the prior authorisation by the CITES authority of the Member State of destination. The persons travelling from the EU to a third country may (re-)export such specimens only based on the prior authorisation by the CITES authority of the Member State where the specimens are located. The documents required to this effect depend on the status of the species in question (i.e. how strictly it is protected, which varies between the different annexes to
egulation (EC) No 338/97) and on the nature and direction of the movement (import, export or re-export). Union law provides, however, for exceptions from the authorisation requirement:  "Personal and household effects": The import or (re-)export of 'personal and household effects' is not subject to prior authorisation.80 81 However, certain conditions regarding the mode and circumstances of the cross-border movement must be fulfilled for dead specimens and parts or derivatives of animals or plants to be considered as 'personal and household effects'. Live animals or plants do not qualify as such. Hunting trophies are generally also covered by these less strict provisions, but hunting trophies from certain strictly protected species are subject to specific rules.82  Pets: People travelling to and from the EU with their pets, where these belong to species listed in the annexes to Regulation (EC) No 338/97 (such as most parrots83, and certain turtles and corals) can apply for a personal ownership certificate.84 Such a certificate can be obtained for a legally acquired live animal held for personal, non-commercial purposes, if the person travelling wants to avoid having to apply for prior authorisation each time an international border is crossed. For travels to and from the EU, the certificate is issued by the CITES authority of the Member State from which the animal originates or, if it originates from a third country, by the CITES authority of the Member State into which it was first introduced
78
Council Regulation (EC) No 338/97 of 9 December 1996 on the protection of species of wild fauna and flora by regulating trade therein, OJ L 61, 3.3.1997, p. 1. 79
The endangered species are listed in the annexes to Regulation (EC) No 338/97
80
Article 7(3) of Regulation (EC) No 338/97. 81
Articles 57, 58 and 58a of Commission Regulation (EC) No. 865/2006 of 4 May 2006 laying down detailed rules concerning the implementation of Council Regulation (EC) No 338/97 on the protection of species of wild fauna and flora by regulating trade therein, OJ L 166, 19.6.2006, p. 1. 82
An overview of the provisions applicable to personal and household effects appears on pp. 78-79 of the Reference Guide  European Wildlife Trade Regulations
available at http://ec.europa.eu/environment/cites/legis_refguide_en.htm
83
Please note that this issue is separate from veterinary requirements (see above, section 5.1).  84
Chapter VIII of Regulation (EC) No. 865/2006.
18 As of the withdrawal date, the authorisation requirement applies to movements of such specimens between the United Kingdom and the EU.
personal ownership certificate issued by the CITES authority of the United Kingdom can, as of the withdrawal date no longer be used for travelling to or from the EU with a live animal. Rather, only certificates issued as of the withdrawal date by the United Kingdom as party to the CITES convention85 will be accepted as of the withdrawal date. Travellers concerned are advise
to contact the CITES authorities86 of the Member State of destination (if it is an import) or where the specimen is located (if it is a (re-)export) in order to apply and obtain the necessary prior authorisations or certificates. 5.7. Invasive alien species87 Union law88 provides that persons travelling to the EU may introduce specimens of invasive alien species of Union concern89 only subject to the prior authorisation by the competent authorities of the Member State of destination and, where relevant, of transit. The prohibition applies to live specimens as well as to any parts, gametes, seeds, eggs or propagules, hybrids, varieties or breeds of these species that might survive and subsequently reproduce. The list of invasive alien species of Union concern is valid throughout the EU territory, excluding the outermost regions, which must establish lists adapted to their own circumstances. However, in addition to the EU list of invasive alien species of Union concern, each Member State may establish its own national list of invasive alien species subject to specific national rules.  As of the withdrawal date, the rules indicated above will become applicable to movements of such specimens from the United Kingdom to the EU.  Travellers concerned are advised to seek advice on such national lists from the competent authorities of the destination or transit Member States.                                                  85
https://cites.org/sites/default/files/document/E-Res-12-03-R17.pdf 86
A list of the CITES authorities of the EU Member States is maintained and updated, in case of changes, by the European Commission and can be consulted at the following address: http://ec.europa.eu/environment/cites/pdf/list_authorities.pdf 87
For more information, please consult http://ec.europa.eu/environment/nature/invasivealien/index_en.htm 88
Regulation (EU) No 1143/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 October 2014 on the prevention and management of the introduction and spread of invasive alien species, OJ L 317, 4.11.2014, p. 35
89
The invasive alien species of Union concern are listed in the annex to Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2016/1141 of 13 July 2016 adopting a list of invasive alien species of Union concern pursuant to Regulation (EU) No 1143/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council, OJ L 189, 14.7.2016, p. 4. See also here: http://ec.europa.eu/environment/nature/invasivealien/list/index_en.htm
19 5.8. Firearms90
Union law91 provides for a specific regime for the movement of firearms between Member States, including firearms accompanying travellers. These rules provide, inter alia, for the issuing of a 'European firearms pass'. This is issued on request by the competent authorities of a Member State to a person who is lawfully entering into possession of and using a firearm.92 Whenever persons want to travel from an EU Member States to another EU Member State, or through an EU Member State, they must obtain prior authorisation from each of those Member States which will then be recorded in the European firearms pass that they must have in their possession throughout their journey. However, there are exceptions to this need for prior authorisation. This is the case for historical re-enactors and hunters, who may travel with specific categories of firearms as long as they are in possession of a European firearms pass listing their firearms and given that they are able to substantiate the reasons for their journey (such as an invitation for an event in Member State of destination). As of the withdrawal date, these rules no longer apply to firearms moved from the United Kingdom to the EU and vice-versa. Rather, rules for bringing firearms into/out of the Union will apply.93 These rules provide for the following:94  Where firearms are brought temporarily into the EU from the United Kingdom, national rules for the declaration and authorisation of firearms will apply.95
With respect to temporary exports from the EU to the United Kingdom of certain firearms by hunters or sport shooters as part of their accompanied personal effects (or for the re-export following temporary admission for hunting or sport shooting activities), no export authorisation will be required, provided that they substantiate to the competent authorities the reasons for the journey.96 When leaving the EU to the United Kingdom                                                  90
For more information, please consult http://ec.europa.eu/growth/sectors/defence/defence-firearms-directives_en and https://ec.europa.eu/home-affairs/what-we-do/policies/organized-crime-and-human-trafficking/trafficking-in-firearms_en.  91
Council Directive 91/477/EEC of 18 June 1991 on control of the acquisition and possession of weapons
OJ L 256, 13.9.1991, p. 51
92
The European Firearms Pass is valid for a maximum period of 5 years, which may be extended. It is a non-transferable document and records the firearms possessed and used by the holder of the pass.  93
Regarding the relevant EU customs rules, see sections 3 and 4 of this notice.  94
It is recalled that the United Kingdom is going to apply, as of the withdrawal date, national rules for imports and exports into/from the United Kingdom. 95
This notice does not address the rules for the placing on the market of firearms imported into the EU, cf. Article 4 of Directive 91/477/EEC
96
Article 9(1)(a) of Regulation (EU) No 258/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 14
20 through a Member State other than the Member State of their residence, hunters and sport shooters shall produce to the competent authorities a European Firearms Pass. In the case of travel by air, the European Firearms Pass shall be produced to the competent authorities where the relevant items are handed over to the airline for transport out of the customs territory of the Union. When leaving the EU to the United Kingdom through the Member State of their residence, hunters and sport shooters may, instead of a European Firearms Pass, choose to produce another document considered valid for this purpose by the competent authorities of that Member State.97 Travellers concerned are advised to enquire with the responsible authorities of the United Kingdom or the relevant EU Member State what the precise conditions for the import, export or transit of firearms are. 6.
SE OF AUTOMOTIVE VEHICLES 6.1. Driving licences98
According to Union law,99 driving licences issued by Member States of the EU are mutually recognised.100 As of the withdrawal date, this mutual recognition will no longer be compulsory as a matter of EU law. Instead, an international agreement, the Vienna Convention on Road Traffic,101 will apply. The United Kingdom and all but four Member States (Ireland, Cyprus, Malta and Spain) are parties to this Convention which provides for the recognition of national driving licences and international driving permits issued by contracting states in accordance with this Convention. The four EU Member States (Ireland, Cyprus, Malta and Spain) which are not parties to the Vienna Convention on Road Traffic are parties to a previous                                                                                                                                                  of and trafficking in firearms, their parts and components and ammunition, supplementing the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organised Crime (UN Firearms Protocol), and establishing export authorisation, and import and transit measures for firearms, their parts and components and ammunition, OJ L 94, 30.3.2012, p. 1
97
Article 9(1)(b) of Regulation (EU) No 258/2012. 98
For more information, please consult https://ec.europa.eu/transport/road_safety/topics/driving-licence/eu-driving_licence_en
99
Article 2 of Directive 2006/126/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 20 December 2006 on driving licences, OJ L 403, 30.12.2006, p. 18. 100
The holder of a valid driving licence issued by an EU Member State may also exchange it for an equivalent driving licence by another Member State if the holder takes up normal residence in that Member State (Articles 11 and 12 of Directive 2006/126/EC). As of the withdrawal date, a driving licence issued by the United Kingdom can no longer be exchanged for a driving licence by an EU-27 Member State on the basis of EU law. A driving licence issued, prior to the withdrawal date, by an EU-27 Member State in exchange of a driving licence issued in the United Kingdom remains valid. 101
Article 41(2) of the Convention on Road Traffic, Vienna, 8 November 1968.
21 international agreement, to which the United Kingdom is also a party 102.This agreement provides for the recognition of driving licences, but parties to this agreement may also require the holders of driving licences to be in possession of an International Driving Permit.  Holders of UK driving licences who intend to drive in the EU are therefore advised to contact the responsible Member State authorities regarding the recognition rules for driving licences. Holders of European Union driving licences who intend to drive in the United Kingdom are advised to contact the responsible authority in the United Kingdom regarding the recognition rules for their driving licences. 6.2. Third party liability insurance103
Union law104 prohibits the use on the territory of the EU Member States of uninsured vehicles, and ensures that insurance against civil liability arising from the use of vehicles covers the entire territory of the EU.105 A vehicle normally based in a third country must be provided with a valid "green card" or with a certificate of frontier insurance.106 Compliance with this requirement may be verified upon entry into the EU. As of the withdrawal date, for vehicles used in the EU but registered in the United Kingdom, only the international Green Card system107 applies. The Green Card system allows the use in a State of a vehicle insured in another State, provided that both States are members of the Green Card system. All EU-27 Member States and the United Kingdom participate in the Green Card system. However, the following should be noted:  The Green Card system does not oblige motor insurers in a Green Card member country to cover the territory of the Green Card member countries (an additional premium might be charged for the coverage).
ravellers to the EU from the United Kingdom with a UK-registered vehicle are advised to ensure, prior to travelling that their motor insurance policy covers the EU. The same applies for travellers from the EU to the United Kingdom with an EU-registered vehicle.                                                  102
Convention on Road Traffic, Geneva, 19 September 1949. 103
For more information please consult https://ec.europa.eu/info/business-economy-euro/banking-and-finance/insurance-and-pensions/motor-insurance_en
104
Article 7 of Directive 2009/103/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 September 2009 relating to insurance against civil liability in respect of the use of motor vehicles, and the enforcement of the obligation to insure against such liability, OJ L 263, 7.10.2009, p. 11. 105
Article 14 of Directive 2009/103/EC. 106
Article 8(1) of Directive 2009/103/EC. 107
http://www.cobx.org/content/default.asp?PageID=57
22  A vehicle normally based in a third country must have present a valid Green Card when entering the EU, unless the third country benefits from a Commission decision that exempts it from this requirement.108
Travellers to the EU from the United Kingdom with a UK-registered vehicle are advised to ensure, prior to travelling, that a Green Card is present in the vehicle, unless they have certainty that the aforementioned Commission decision has been taken. Travellers from the EU to the United Kingdom with an EU-registered vehicle are advised to travel with the Green Card in the vehicle, or query the matter with the authorities in the United Kingdom. 7.
EDICAL TREATMENT AND RELATED ISSUES
EMERGENCIES 7.1. Entitlement of healthcare under Union law on social security coordination109 Union law110 provides for access to healthcare during temporary stay abroad based on the European Health Insurance Card (EHIC) or, for planned treatments, based on the prior authorisation by the relevant competent institution (e.g. the institution with which the person concerned is insured). Costs of such healthcare are reimbursed between the relevant institutions of the Member States involved.  As of the withdrawal date, these rules no longer apply vis
-vis the United Kingdom.111 This means the following:  As of the withdrawal date, nationals of EU-27 Member States and their family members will not be able to access healthcare for unexpected care in the United Kingdom on the basis of EHIC. UK nationals will not be able to access healthcare in the EU-27 on the basis of EHIC as of the withdrawal date. Persons insured in an EU-27 Member State and intending to travel in the United Kingdom are advised to query with the institution with which they are insured whether it will reimburse healthcare accessed in a third country. The same applies to persons insured in the United Kingdom and intending to travel in the EU-27.                                                  108
Article 8(2) of Directive 2009/103/EC. Regarding non-EEA States, such Commission decisions have been taken for Andorra, Serbia and Switzerland. 109
For more information, please consult http://ec.europa.eu/social/main.jsp?catId=559
110
Regulation (EC) No 883/2004 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 29 April 2004 on the coordination of social security systems, OJ L 166, 30.4.2004, p. 1
111
In the context of the negotiations of the EU-UK withdrawal agreement, the EU is trying to agree solutions with the United Kingdom to ensure reimbursement, recovery and offsetting in relation to events that occurred before the end of the transition period. For information on the ongoing negotiations, see https://ec.europa.eu/commission/brexit-negotiations_en
23 Where reimbursement is not ensured, persons concerned should consider taking out private travel insurance.  As of the withdrawal date, prior authorisations for planned treatments in the United Kingdom can no longer be issued by EU-27 Member States on the basis of Union law. No prior authorisations can be issued by the United Kingdom for planned treatments in the EU-27 on the basis of Union law. 7.2. Entitlement of re-imbursement for cross-border healthcare under Union law on cross-border healthcare112
Apart from the system of social security coordination referred to in section 7.1 of this notice, Union law113 also provides for the possibility to obtain, under certain circumstances, reimbursement by the Member State of affiliation for a cross-border healthcare treatment in another Member State. As of the withdrawal date, patients affiliated in an EU-27 Member State will no longer benefit from the rules on reimbursement set out in that legislation as regards the cross-border treatment provided in the United Kingdom. Nor will patients affiliated in the United Kingdom any longer benefit from EU rules on reimbursement. It will be up to the EU-27 Member State of affiliation and the United Kingdom to decide on the reimbursement of such healthcare based on national law (in the same way as for healthcare received in other third countries).  Patients intending to obtain, as of the withdrawal date, reimbursement from an EU-27 Member State of affiliation for a treatment provided in the United Kingdom should query with their National Contact Points set up in accordance with Union law.114
The same applies to patients intending to obtain, as of the withdrawal date, reimbursement from the United Kingdom.115 7.3. Recognition of medical prescriptions issued in another Member State116 Union law117 obliges Member States to recognise cross-border medical prescriptions of medicinal products or medical devices issued in another                                                  112
For more information, please consult https://ec.europa.eu/health/cross_border_care/overview_en
113
Directive 2011/24/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 9 March 2011 on the -border healthcare (OJ L 88, 4.4.2011, p. 45). 114
Article 6 of Directive 2011/24/EU
115
Please note that the Union law obliging the EU Member States to maintain National Contact Point
to inform patients about cross-border healthcare will no longer apply to the United Kingdom as of the withdrawal date. 116
For more information, please consult https://ec.europa.eu/health/sites/health/files/cross_border_care/docs/impl_directive_presciptions_2012_en.pdf
24 Member State. A medical prescription issued in the United Kingdom, as of the withdrawal date, will no longer be recognised in an EU-27 Member State on the basis of Union law. 7.4. European emergency number  112118 Union law119 obliges Member States to ensure that all end-users of electronic communications services allowing calls from fixed and mobile telephones, including from payphones, are able to call the "European emergency number" 112 free of charge
In addition, users with disabilities must have access to emergency services that is equivalent to that enjoyed by other users.
s of the withdrawal date, these obligation
no longer appl
to the United Kingdom. 7.5. Parking cards for disabled120 EU law121 recommend
that EU Member States mutually recognise parking cards for people with disabilities, introduced in accordance with the standardised EU-model parking card.122 Under current practices, United Kingdom authorities123 usually recognise EU-model parking cards issued by other EU Member States, allowing owners of an EU-model parking card to park in parking spaces reserved for disabled persons in the United Kingdom. The same holds usually for the recognition, in an EU-27 Member State of a United Kingdom national parking card (the so-called "Blue Badge").124 There is no certainty that authorities in the EU and in United Kingdom will maintain the usual practice of mutual recognition of each other's parking cards                                                                                                                                                  117
Article 11(1) of Directive 2011/24/EU, Commission Implementing Directive 2012/52/EU of 20 December 2012 laying down measures to facilitate the recognition of medical prescriptions issued in another Member State (OJ L 356, 22.12.2012, p. 68). 118
For more information, please consult https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/112
119
Article 26 of Directive 2002/22/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 7 March 2002 on universal service and users' rights relating to electronic communications networks and services (Universal Service Directive)
OJ L 108, 24.4.2002, p. 51
120
For more information, please consult https://europa.eu/youreurope/citizens/travel/transport-disability/parking-card-disabilities-people/index_en.htm
121
Council Recommendation 98/376/EC of 4 June 1998 on a parking card for people with disabilities
OJ L 167, 12.6.1998, p. 25
122   See Annex to Recommendation 98/376/EC. Issuance and management of EU-model parking cards as well as the applicable conditions remain the competence of national and local authorities.  123
Enforcement of these national conditions is normally conducted by police and local authorities
124
The UK has opted for a national model, encompassing some of the key-features of the EU-model card.
25 for people with disabilities. This will be a matter for the discretion of these authorities. Persons with disabilities using a parking card for people with disabilities may therefore wish to contact the relevant authorities in advance. 7.6. Consular protection125 Union law126 entitles EU citizens to consular protection by the diplomatic or consular authorities of any EU Member State, if they find themselves in a situation where they require assistance outside the EU with no embassy or consulate from their own Member State effectively in a position to help them
they are unrepresented). Unrepresented EU citizens are entitled to receive consular protection on the same conditions as the nationals of the EU Member State they turn to. As of the withdrawal date, UK nationals will no longer be able to benefit from this right and EU-27 citizens will no longer be able to turn to UK embassies and consulates to seek consular protection on the basis of EU law.  7.7. Compensation mechanism for persons injured by a car in another Member State ("visiting victims")127 Union law provides for a compensation mechanism for injured persons in an accident occurring in another Member State and caused by the use of a vehicle based in that Member State ("visiting victims").128 This mechanism provides for compensation of the victim by the "compensation body" of the Member State of residence of the victim if the insurer fails to communicate with the injured party within a given deadline.129
As of the withdrawal date, this mechanism no longer applies to persons residing in the United Kingdom and injured by a ca
while visiting an EU-27 Member State and vice-versa
125
For more information, please consult https://ec.europa.eu/info/policies/justice-and-fundamental-rights/eu-citizenship/consular-protection_en
126
Articles 20(2)
) and 23 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union and Article 46 of the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights. The right to consular protection is further elaborated in Council Directive (EU) 2015/637 of 20 April 2015 on the coordination and cooperation measures to facilitate consular protection for unrepresented citizens of the Union in third countries
OJ L 106, 24.4.2015, p.
127
For more information, please consult https://ec.europa.eu/info/business-economy-euro/banking-and-finance/insurance-and-pensions/motor-insurance_en
128
Chapter 7 of Directive 2009/103/EC of 16 September 2009 relating to insurance against civil liability in respect of the use of motor vehicles, and the enforcement of the obligation to insure against such liability, OJ L 263, 7.10.2009, p. 11. 129
Subsequently, that compensation body can claim compensation from the compensation body of the Member State in which the insurance undertaking which issued the policy is established, Article 24(2) of Directive 2009/103/EC.
26 8.
NSURANCE
PASSENGER RIGHTS 8.1. Insolvency travel insurance Union law130 provides obligations for traders who organise package travel or facilitate linked travel arrangements, among others to protect travellers against insolvency.  Organisers and traders must comply with these obligations even when they are established in third countries131 as long as they sell or offer such services in an EU Member State or direct their activities to an EU Member State (by inter alia using a language or a currency other than the language or currency of the Member State of establishment).  In addition, when travellers buy packages from organisers established in a third country via retailers established in the EU, the performance of the package and the securities for the refunds of the unless the retailer provide
evidence that the organiser complies with these obligations.132
Hence, as of the withdrawal date, EU law obliging organisers to protect travellers against the insolvency of the organiser will cease to apply where the organiser established in the United Kingdom does not direct its selling activities to the EU, and the package travel is not bought through a retailer in the EU
In these cases, travellers are advised to assess the need to protect themselves against a possible insolvency of the organiser. 8.2. EU passenger rights133 Union law provides for a set of rights for passengers, not only for air, but also for ship, bus and coach and rail passengers. These rights relate to information, reimbursement and re-routing, compensation, assistance and care, right of redress, and special rights for persons with disabilities and with reduced mobility. As of the withdrawal date, EU passenger rights may no longer apply to travel between the EU and the United Kingdom, or may be limited.                                                  130
Article 17 of Directive (EU) 2015/2302 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 November 2015 on package travel and linked travel arrangements, OJ L 326, 11.12.2015, p. 1. 131
See the second subparagraph of Article 17(1) of Directive (EU) 2015/2302 as well as Regulations (EC) No 593/2008 and (EU) 1215/2012, in conjunction with recital 50 of Directive (EU) 2015/2302
132
See Article 20 of Directive (EU) 2015/2302. 133
For more information, please consult https://europa.eu/youreurope/citizens/travel/passenger-rights/index_en.htm
27 8.2.1. Air passenger rights As of the withdrawal date, EU air passenger rights134 will no longer apply to a flight with a non-EU carrier from an airport located in the United Kingdom to an airport located in the EU. The air passenger rights granted by EU law will however continue to apply to
(i) flights departing from the United Kingdom to an airport situated in the territory of an EU-27 Member State operated by a Community carrier; as well as (ii) flights departing from the EU-27 to a United Kingdom airport operated by any carrier.
Travellers should thus be aware that, depending on the carrier chosen, certain EU passenger rights will no longer apply to inbound flights to the EU. EU law granting specific rights for persons with disabilities and persons with reduced mobility135 travelling by air will no longer apply to air services that, as of the withdrawal date,  (i) depart from an airport in the United Kingdom,  (ii) transit through an airport in the United Kingdom, or  (iii) arrive at an airport in the United Kingdom.
However, certain rights, such as assistance by air carriers, continue to apply to air passengers departing from a United Kingdom airport to an EU-27 airport if the operating carrier is a Community air carrier. 8.2.2. Ship passengers rights EU ship passenger rights136 continue to apply where  (i) the port of embarkation is in the EU-27; or  (ii) the port of embarkation is in the United Kingdom, if the port of disembarkation is in the EU-27 and the service is operated by a carrier established within the territory of a Member State or offering                                                  134
Regulation (EC) No 261/2004 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 February 2004 establishing common rules on compensation and assistance to passengers in the event of denied boarding and of cancellation or long delay of flights, OJ L 46, 17.2.2004, p. 1. 135
Regulation (EC) No 1107/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 5 July 2006 concerning the rights of disabled persons and persons with reduced mobility when travelling by air OJ L 204, 26.7.2006, p. 1. 136
Regulation (EU) No 1177/2010 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 November 2010 concerning the rights of passengers when travelling by sea and inland waterway, OJ L 334, 17.12.2010, p. 1.
28 passenger transport services to or from a Member State ("Union carrier").   Travellers should be aware that, depending on the carrier chosen, EU passenger rights may no longer apply to journeys to the EU. Regarding cruise passengers, the current set of EU passenger rights continues to apply if the port of embarkation is situated in a Member State. 8.2.3. Bus and coach passenger rights  EU bus and coach passenger rights137 continue to apply to passengers travelling with regular services138 where the boarding or the alighting point of the passengers is situated in the territory of a Member State and where the scheduled distance of the service is 250 km or more. For passengers where a scheduled distance of the service is less than 250 km, a reduced set of rules applies. Some Member States have exempted services from the application of the Regulation on passenger rights if a significant part of a regular service (including at least one scheduled stop) is operated outside the Union.139 The bus and coach passenger rights granted by EU law will therefore continue to apply  if no exemption applies
to
i) passengers departing from the United Kingdom to a destination situated in the territory of an EU-27 Member State; as well as
ii) passengers departing from the EU-27 to a United Kingdom destination. 8.2.4. Rail passengers rights EU rail passenger rights140 apply to all rail journeys and services which  (i) take place within the EU territory; and (ii) are being performed by a railway undertaking licensed in accordance with the EU rules
137
Regulation (EU) No 181/2011 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 February 2011 concerning the rights of passengers in bus and coach transport, OJ L 55, 28.2.2011, p. 1. 138
A more limited set of rights apply to occasional services. 139 For more information, please consult https://ec.europa.eu/transport/sites/transport/files/themes/passengers/road/doc/exemptions-from-bus-coach-passengers-rights-and-obligations.pdf
140
Regulation (EC) No 1371/2007 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 October 2007 on ions OJ L 315, 3.12.2007, p. 14.
29 Therefore, as of the withdrawal date, EU rail passengers' rights will no longer apply on the UK sections of rail journeys between the United Kingdom and an EU Member State. 9.
THER ISSUES 9.1. Card payments141 While the acceptance of debit or credit cards for payment transactions depends on the respective preferences of merchants, Union law142 sets limits to interchange fees charged to merchants in respect of such transactions. These rules only apply where both the payer's payment service provider and the payee's payment service provider are located in the EU.143 As of the withdrawal date, transactions between the EU-27 and the United Kingdom will no longer be covered by the EU rules limiting interchange fees.  Provided that merchants are allowed to apply surcharges on consumers for card payments
this may lead to a higher surcharge for card payments. 9.2. Roaming144 Union law145 on roaming services prohibit
any surcharge on roaming customers by the roaming provider (i.e. the domestic provider of mobile communications services
voice, SMS or data services) operating in an EU Member State in addition to the domestic retail price when travelling in the EU.  As of the withdrawal date, this obligation in Union law on the roaming provider will no longer apply either to roaming providers operating in the United Kingdom whenever their customers are roaming in the EU, or to roaming providers operating in the EU whenever their customers are roaming in the United Kingdom. Nevertheless, roaming providers operating in a Member State will remain subject to the obligation in Union law to inform their customers about the roaming charges for the services provided applicable whenever they travel to the Unite
Kingdom.146
141
For more information, please consult https://europa.eu/youreurope/citizens/consumers/financial-products-and-services/payments-transfers-cheques/index_en.htm 142
Articles 3 and 4 of Regulation (EU) 2015/751 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 29 April 2015 on interchange fees for card-based payment transactions, OJ, L 123, 19.5.2015, p. 1. 143
Article 1(1) of Regulation (EU) 2015/751  144
For more information, please consult https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/roaming 145
Regulation (EU) No 531/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 June 2012 on roaming on public mobile communications networks within the Union, OJ L 172, 30.6.2012, p. 10. 146
Articles 14 and 15 of Regulation (EU) No 531/2012.
30 9.3. Portability of online content services147 Union law on portability of online content services148 allows EU consumers who buy or subscribe in their Member State of residence to online content services
to watch films or sporting events, listen to music, download e-books or play games
to continue accessing these services without additional costs when they travel or stay temporarily in other EU Member States (cross-border portability
As of the withdrawal date, this obligation in Union law will no longer apply to providers of paid online content services in the EU-27 when their customers travel in the United Kingdom.  Also, as of the withdrawal date, this obligation in Union law will no longer apply to providers of paid online content services in the United Kingdom when their customers travel in the EU.  This means that customers of paid online content services in the EU-27 and in the United Kingdom may not be able to access the online content services they have subscribed to in the EU and in the United Kingdom respectively when travelling in the United Kingdom or the EU respectively, or may have a limited access to the service (e.g. access to a different catalogue).
147
For more information, please consult https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/cross-border-portability-online-content-services 148
Regulation (EU) 2017/1128 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 14 June 2017 on cross-border portability of online content services in the internal market, OJ L 168, 30.6.2017, p. 1.
31
NNEX
EU
EAFLET ON PERSONAL CONSIGNMENTS OF PRODUCTS OF ANIMAL ORIGIN THAT FORM PART OF TRAVELLERS
LUGGAGE Keep infectious animal diseases out of the EU! Animal products may carry pathogens causing infectious disease Due to the risk of introducing diseases into the European Union (EU), there are strict procedures for the introduction of certain animal products into the EU. These procedures do not apply to the movements of animal products between the 27 Member States of the EU, or for animal products coming from Andorra, Liechtenstein, Norway, San Marino, and Switzerland. All animal products not conforming to these rules must be surrendered on arrival in the EU for official disposal. Failure to declare such items may result in a fine or criminal prosecution. 1. Small quantities of meat and milk and their products (other than powdered infant milk, infant food, and special foods or special pet feed required for medical reasons)
You may only bring in or send to the EU personal consignments of meat and milk and their products (other than powdered infant milk, infant food, and special foods or special pet feed required for medical reasons) provided that they come from , the Faeroe Islands, Greenland, or Iceland, and their weight does not exceed 10 kg per person.
2. Powdered infant milk, infant food, and special foods required for medical reasons
You may only bring in or send to the EU personal consignments of powdered infant milk, infant food, and special foods required for medical reasons provided that:  they come from the Faeroe Islands, Greenland, or Iceland, and their combined quantity does not exceed the weight limit of 10 kg per person, and that:      the product does not require refrigeration before consumption,     it is a packaged proprietary brand product, and     the packaging is unbroken unless in current use
they come from other countries (other than the Faeroe Islands, Greenland, or Iceland), and their combined quantity does not exceed the weight limit of 2 kg per person, and that:     the product does not require refrigeration before consumption,      it is a packaged proprietary brand product, and      the packaging is unbroken unless in current use.
3. Pet feed required for medical reasons You may only bring in or send to the EU personal consignments of pet feed required for medical reasons provided that:  they come from the Faeroe Islands, Greenland, or Iceland, and their combined quantity does not exceed the weight limit of 10 kg per person, and that:  the product does not require refrigeration before consumption,  it is a packaged proprietary brand product, and  the packaging is unbroken unless in current use
they come from other countries (other than the Faeroe Islands, Greenland, or Iceland), and their combined quantity does not exceed the weight limit of 2 kg per person, and that:  the product does not require refrigeration before consumption,  it is a packaged proprietary brand product, and
32  the packaging is unbroken unless in current use 4. Small quantities of fishery products for personal human consumption You may only bring in or send to the EU personal consignments of fishery products (including fresh, dried, cooked, cured or smoked fish, and certain shellfish, such as prawns, lobsters, dead mussels and dead oysters) provided that:
fresh fish are eviscerated,  the weight of the fishery products does not exceed, per person, 20 kg or the weight of one fish, whichever weight is the highest. These restrictions do not apply to fishery products coming from the Faeroe Islands or Iceland. 5. Small quantities of other animal products for personal human consumption You may only bring in or send to the EU other animal products, such as honey, live oysters, live mussels and snails for example, provided that:  they come from the Faeroe Islands, Greenland, or Iceland, and that their combined weight does not exceed 10 kg per person,  they come from other countries (other than the Faeroe Islands, Greenland, or Iceland) and their combined weight does not exceed 2 kg per person. Please note that you may bring in small quantities of animal products from several of the above five categories (paragraphs 1-5) provided that they comply with the rules explained in each of the relevant paragraphs. 6. Larger quantities of animal products You may only bring in or send to the EU larger quantities of animal products if they meet the requirements for commercial consignments, which include:  certification requirements, as laid down in the appropriate official EC veterinary certificate,  the presentation of the goods, with the correct documentation, to an authorised EU border inspection post for veterinary control, on arrival in the EU.
7. Exempted animal products The following products are exempted from the rules explained previously:  bread, cakes, biscuits, chocolate and confectionery (including sweets) not mixed or filled with meat product,  food supplements packaged for the final consumer,  meat extracts and meat concentrates,  olives stuffed with fish,  pasta and noodles not mixed or filled with meat product,  soup stocks and flavourings packaged for the final consumer,  any other food product not containing any fresh or processed meat or dairy and with less than 50
of processed egg or fishery products.
8. Animal products from protected species For certain protected species there may be additional restrictions in place. For example for caviar of sturgeon species, the weight limit is a maximum of 125 g per person.
EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL CLIMATE ACTION
Brussels, 13 November 2018
OTICE TO STAKEHOLDER
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND EU RULES FOR CO2 STANDARDS FOR NEW PASSENGER CARS AND NEW LIGHT COMMERCIAL VEHICLES
The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. This means that, unless a ratified withdrawal agreement
establishes another date, all Union primary and secondary law will cease to apply to the United Kingdom from 30 March 2019, 00:00h (CET) ('the withdrawal date').
The United Kingdom will then become a 'third country'.
Preparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for EU and national authorities, but also for private parties. In view of the considerable uncertainties, in particular concerning the content of a possible withdrawal agreement, stakeholders are reminded of legal repercussions which need to be considered when the United Kingdom becomes a third country.  Subject to any transitional arrangement that may be contained in a possible withdrawal agreement, as of the withdrawal date, the EU CO
standards for new passenger cars and new light commercial vehicles
will no longer apply to the United Kingdom. This has in particular the following consequences: 1.
PECIFIC EMISSIONS TARGETS  Article 4 of Regulation (EC) No 443/2009 and Article 4 of Regulation (EU) No 510/2011 provides an obligation for manufacturers of new passenger cars and new light commercial vehicles to meet specific CO
targets that are calculated annually
Negotiations are ongoing with the United Kingdom with a view to reaching a withdrawal agreement.
Furthermore, in accordance with Article 50(3) of the Treaty on European Union, the European Council, in agreement with the United Kingdom, may unanimously decide that the Treaties cease to apply at a later date.
A third country is a country not member of the EU.
Regulation (EC) No 443/2009 of the European Parliament and the Council of 23 April 2009 setting emission performance standards for new passenger cars as part of the Community's integrated approach to reduce CO2 emissions from light-duty vehicles, OJ L 140 5.6.2009, p. 1; Regulation (EU) No 510/2011 of the European Parliament and the Council of 11 May 2011 setting emission performance standards for new light commercial vehicles as part of the Union's integrated approach to reduce CO 2 emissions from light-duty vehicles, OJ L 145, 31.5.2011, p. 1
2 taking into account the EU wide reduction targets set out in Article 1 of the respective Regulation (i.e. passenger cars: 130gCO2/km by 2015 and 95g CO2/km by 2021; light commercial vehicles: 175gCO2/km by 2017 and 147gCO2/km by 2020). It is for manufacturers to ensure that the average CO
emissions of their fleet of newly registered vehicles do not exceed their annual specific emissions target
As of the withdrawal date, new passenger cars and new light commercial vehicles registered in the United Kingdom will no longer count towards the calculation of the average specific emissions of CO
in the EU. 2.
NNUAL TRANSMISSION OF CO
EMISSION DATA According to Article 8 of Regulation (EC) No 443/2009 and Article 8 of Regulation (EU) No 510/2011, by 28 February each year, Member States must record and transmit to the Commission certain data on new passenger cars and new light commercial vehicles registered in the Union in the preceding calendar year. That data will form the basis for determining the average specific emissions of CO
and the specific emissions target for each manufacturer and will also serve for assessing whether manufacturers comply with those targets.
Data for new registrations in 2018 transmitted by 28 February 2019 prior to the withdrawal date will be considered for determining the 2018 average specific emissions of CO
and the specific emissions target for that year for manufacturers of new passenger cars and new light commercial vehicles. As of the withdrawal date, the United Kingdom is no longer required to record and transmit to the Commission data on registrations in the United Kingdom, i.e. in 2020 the United Kingdom is no longer obliged to transmit the data in relation to registrations in the calendar year 2019. 3.
EROGATIONS FROM THE SPECIFIC EMISSIONS TARGET According to Article 11 of Regulation (EC) No 443/2009 and Article 11 of Regulation (EU) No 510/2011, manufacturers may under certain conditions benefit from derogations from their specific emission targets
if they are responsible for fewer than 300 000 new registrations of passenger cars and fewer than 22 000 new registrations of light commercial vehicles in the EU per calendar year.
egistrations in the United Kingdom as of the withdrawal date do not count when assessing whether a manufacturer is eligible for such derogation
If the withdrawal of the United Kingdom affects the eligibility of a manufacturer for a derogation
that manufacturer must notify the Commission immediately.

In order to ensure the consistency of the data to be transmitted by the Member States, Commission Regulation (EU) No 1014/2010 of 10 November 2010 on monitoring and reporting of data on the registration of new passenger cars pursuant to Regulation (EC) No 443/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council (OJ L 293, 11.11.2010, p. 15
and Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) No 293/2012 of 3 April 2012 on monitoring and reporting of data on the registration of new light commercial vehicles pursuant to Regulation (EU) No 510/2011 of the European Parliament and of the Council (OJ L 98, 4.4.2012, p. 1
set out rules on the collection and reporting of that data.
4. EU REPRESENTATIVES Pursuant to Article 3(1)(c) of Regulation (EC) No 443/2009 and Article 3(1)(f) of Regulation (EU) No 510/2011 read in conjunction with Article 3(27) and (28) and Article 5(3) of Directive 2007/46/EC, as of the withdrawal date,  a manufacturer based in the United Kingdom has to have an EU representative in the EU-27;  a manufacturer based in a third country whose EU representative is currently based in the United Kingdom has to have an EU representative in the EU-27. The Commission should be informed immediately of the contact details of the EU representative.
European Commission Directorate-General Climate Action
EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL CLIMATE ACTION
Brussels, 19 December 2018 Rev1
OTICE TO STAKEHOLDER
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND EU RULES ON THE MONITORING AND VERIFICATION OF CO
EMISSIONS FROM MARITIME TRANSPORT
The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. This
the United Kingdom will be
Preparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for EU and national authorities but also for private parties.  In view of the uncertainties surrounding the ratification of the Withdrawal Agreement, all interested parties, and especially economic operators, are reminded of legal repercussions, which need to be considered when the United Kingdom becomes a third country. Subject to the transition period provided for in the draft Withdrawal Agreement,
as of the withdrawal date, the EU rules governing reporting, monitoring and verification of CO
emissions from maritime transport, and in particular, Regulation (EU) 2015/757 on the Monitoring, Reporting and Verification of Carbon Dioxide (CO2) Emissions from Maritime Transport,
no longer apply to the United Kingdom. This has in particular the following consequences: 1.
COPE OF THE MONITORING OBLIGATION According to Articles 4(1) and 6(1) of Regulation (EU) 2015/757, companies shall monitor and report CO
emissions of their ships  regardless of their flag  within Member State ports and for any voyage to or from the port of a Member State.
In accordance with Article 50(3) of the Treaty on European Union, the European Council, in agreement with the United Kingdom, may unanimously decide that the Treaties cease to apply at a later date.
A third country is a country not member of the EU.
Cf. Part four of the draft Agreement on the withdrawal of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland from the European Union and the European Atomic Energy Community, as agreed at negotiator's level on 14 November 2018 (https://ec.europa.eu/commission/publications/draft-agreement-withdrawal-uk-eu-agreed-negotiators-level-14-november-2018-including-text-article-132_en)
OJ L 123, 19.5.2015, p. 55.
Companies have to submit monitoring plans to accredited verifiers setting out inter alia the monitoring method for each of their ships, as well as verified annual emission reports containing all relevant data to the European Commission and the authorities of the Flag State
As of the withdrawal date, CO
emissions

f ships within ports under the jurisdiction of the United Kingdom
and   from voyages from a port of the United Kingdom to the port of a third country, and vice-versa do not fall under these monitoring and reporting requirements. 2.
OCUMENTS OF COMPLIANCE
ACCREDITATION OF VERIFIERS According to Articles 13 and 17 of Regulation (EU) 2015/757, a verifier shall assess the conformity of the monitoring plan with the Regulation and issue a document of compliance. According to Article 17(4) of Regulation (EU) 2015/757, the verifier shall inform the Commission and the flag State of the issuance of the document of compliance.
According to Article 16 of Regulation (EU) 2015/757, the verifier has to be accredited by a national accreditation body of an EU Member State in line with Regulation (EC) No 765/2008
As of the withdrawal date, accreditation
by the UK National Accreditation Body will no longer be valid in the EU
As a consequence, as of the withdrawal date, verifiers accredited by the UK National Accreditation Body can no longer issue documents of compliance under Regulation (EU) 2015/757
The website of the Commission on reducing greenhouse gas emissions from the shipping sector
https://ec.europa.eu/clima/policies/transport/shipping_en) provide
general information in this regard. These pages will be updated with further information, where necessary.
European Commission
irectorate
eneral Climate Action
In addition, according to Article 18 of Regulation (EU) 2015/757, ships arriving at, within or departing from a port of a Member State have to carry on board a valid document of compliance to demonstrate compliance with the monitoring, reporting and verification obligations under the Regulation.
Regulation (EC) No 765/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 9 July 2008 setting out the requirements for accreditation and market surveillance relating to the marketing of products, OJ L 218, 13.8.2008, p. 30.
EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL CLIMATE ACTION
Brussels, 19 December 2018 Rev1
OTICE TO STAKEHOLDER
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND THE EU
MISSIONS TRADING SYSTEM (ETS) The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. This means that as from 30 March 2019, 00:00h (CET)
the United Kingdom will be a third country
Preparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for EU and national authorities but also for private parties.  In view of the uncertainties surrounding the ratification of the Withdrawal Agreement, all interested parties, and especially economic operators, are reminded of legal repercussions, which need to be considered when the United Kingdom becomes a third country
Subject to the transition period provided for in the draft Withdrawal Agreement,
as of the withdrawal date, the EU rules governing the EU Emission Trading System, and in particular Directive 2003/87/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 October 2003 establishing a system for greenhouse gas emission allowance trading within the Union
and Commission Regulation (EU) No 389/2013 of 2 May 2013 establishing a Union Registry5, no longer apply to the United Kingdom. This has in particular the following consequences:


n accordance with Article 50(3) of the Treaty on European Union, the European Council, in agreement with the United Kingdom, may unanimously decide that the Treaties cease to apply at a later date.
A third country is a country not member of the EU.
Cf. Part four of the draft Agreement on the withdrawal of the United Kingdom of Great Bri
in and Northern Ireland from the European Union and the European Atomic Energy Community, as agreed at negotiator's level on 14 November 2018 (https://ec.europa.eu/commission/publications/draft-agreement-withdrawal-uk-eu-agreed-negotiators-level-14-november-2018-including-text-article-132_en)
OJ L 275, 25.10.2003, p. 32.
Commission Regulation (EU) No 389/2013 of 2 May 2013 establishing a Union Registry pursuant to Directive 2003/87/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council, OJ L 122, 3.5.2013, p. 1.
2 1.
COPE OF THE EU
MISSION TRADING SYSTEM Directive 2003/87/EC applies to emissions from activities listed in its Annex I and greenhouse gases listed in its Annex II (cf. Article 2 of Directive 2003/87/EC). Annex I to Directive 2003/87/EC includes certain activities carried out in stationary installations as well as aviation.  1.1. Stationary installations According to Directive 2003/87/EC, the EU Emission
Trading System includes all stationary installations in an EU Member State that carry out activities listed in Annex I of Directive 2003/87/EC and emit greenhouse gases listed in Annex II of Directive 2003/87/EC
As of the withdrawal date, stationary installations in the United Kingdom are no longer within the scope of Union law and the EU Emission Trading System
1.2. Aviation While Directive 2003/87/EC generally applies to depart from an aerodrome situated in the territory of a Member State to which of Directive 2003/87/EC), it also provides for a derogation from its core substantive obligflights to and from aerodromes located in countries of Directive 2003/87/EC).  As of the withdrawal date, the derogation from the EU Emission Trading System applies to flights from the United Kingdom to the EU and vice-versa
2.
DMINISTERING MEMBER STATE FOR AIRCRAFT OPERATORS To ensure the correct implementation of the EU Emission Trading System for aviation, Article 18a of Directive 2003/87/EC establishes the administering Member State for aircraft operators. As of the withdrawal date, the United Kingdom no longer acts as administering Member State. The Commission services will update the attribution list of aircraft operators set out in Commission Regulation (EC) No 748/2009
in the context of the annual update7, to inform aircraft operators of the administering Member State.
9
Commission Regulation (EC) No 748/2009 of 5 August 2009 on the list of aircraft operators which performed an aviation activity listed in Annex I to Directive 2003/87/EC on or after 1 January 2006 specifying the administering Member State for each aircraft operator, OJ L 219, 22.8.2009, p. 1
7
Article 18a(3)(b) of Directive 2003/87/EC.
See Annex 2 to Commission Communication "Preparing for the withdrawal of the United Kingdom from the European Union on 30 March 2019: a Contingency Action Plan", COM(2018)880, 13 November 2018.
3 3.
ERIFICATION REPORT
ACCREDITATION OF VERIFIERS According to Article 14(3) of Directive 2003/87/EC, installation or aircraft operators have to monitor and report CO
emissions annually to the competent authority. According to Article 15 of Directive 2003/87/EC, these reports shall be verified.
According to Article 4
and Annex II of Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2018/2067 on the verification of data and on the accreditation of verifiers pursuant to Directive 2003/87/EC10
a verifier issuing a verification report has to be accredited according to the provisions of that Regulation and of Regulation (EC) No 765/2008.11 As of the withdrawal date, accreditations by the UK National Accreditation Body will no longer be valid in the EU.
As a consequence, as of the withdrawal date, verifiers accredited by the UK National Accreditation Body can no longer issue verification reports under Directive 2003/87/EC. 4.
CCOUNTS HELD IN THE UNION REGISTRY According to Article 19 of Directive 2003/87/EC, emission allowances issued under the EU ETS are held in a Union Registry
The Union Registry keeps track of the ownership of allowances held in electronic accounts for stationary installations and for aircraft operators. The Union Registry also serves as the Kyoto Protocol registry of the EU and of the individual Member States.12 Accounts in the Union Registry are administered by an EU Member State.  As of the withdrawal date, the United Kingdom can no longer administer account
in the Union Registry and the Union Registry no longer serve
as the Kyoto Protocol registry of the United Kingdom. Account
in the Union Registry
This attribution is also relevant in the context of aviation security, since it establishes the "appropriate authority" to designate air carriers operating into the Union from a third country airport.
ee Section 6.8.1.1.b. of the Annex to Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2015/1998 of 5 November 2015 laying down detailed measures for the implementation of the common basic standards on aviation security (OJ L 299, 14.11.2015, p. 1) and the "Notice to stakeholders
Withdrawal of the United Kingdom and EU rules in the field of aviation security and maritime security
(REV1, 23 October 2018). 10
Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2018/2067 of 19 December 2018 on the verification of data and on the accreditation of verifiers pursuant to Directive 2003/87/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council
OJ L 334, 31.12.2018, p. 94. 11
Regulation (EC) No 765/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 9 July 2008 setting out the requirements for accreditation and market surveillance relating to the marketing of products, OJ L 218, 13.8.2008, p. 30
12
Article 10 of Regulation (EU) No 525/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 21 May 2013 on a mechanism for monitoring and reporting greenhouse gas emissions and for reporting other information at national and Union level relevant to climate change, OJ L 165, 18.6.2013, p. 13

administered by the United Kingdom and accounts in the Kyoto Protocol registry of the United Kingdom can no longer be accessed as of the withdrawal date
5.
UCTIONS
FREE ALLOCATION AND EXCHANGE OF INTERNATIONAL CREDITS The EU ETS provides for auctioning by Member States13, free allocation of allowances by Member States14 and exchang
of international credits by installation and aircraft operators.15 As of the withdrawal date, no more auctions by the United Kingdom, no more allocation of free allowances to the accounts administered by the United Kingdom can take place and no exchanges of international credits can be performed by installation and aircraft operators administered by the United Kingdom
Stakeholders are reminded that from 1 January 2019 emission allowances auctioned or allocated by the United Kingdom will be identified by a country code.16 Emission allowances marked with a country code cannot be surrendered by any installation or aircraft operator.17 The marking of allowances auctioned or allocated by the United Kingdom will be lifted on the day following the one on which the ratification instruments concerning the Withdrawal Agreement are deposited.18 Moreover, according to Article 99(5) of Regulation (EU) No 389/2013, the Commission has the power to suspend, with regard to the United Kingdom, the free allocation, auctioning of allowances and the exchange of international credits
On this basis, as part of its contingency measures, the Commission has instructed the central administrator to suspend relevant processes for the United Kingdom from 1 January 2019
ntil the day following that on which the ratification instruments concerning the Withdrawal Agreement are deposited.19
13
Article 10 of Directive 2003/87/EC. 14
Article 10
of Directive 2003/87/EC. 15
Article 11a of Directive 2003/87/EC. 16
Article 41(4) of Regulation (EU) No 389/2013. 17
Article 67(4) of Regulation (EU) No 389/2013
18
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU)  amending Commission Regulation No 389/2013 of 2 May 2013 establishing a Union Registry (C(2018)8871 final) (https://ec.europa.eu/clima/policies/ets_en).
19
Commission Decision of 17 December 2018
n instructing the central administrator to temporarily suspend the acceptance by the European Union Transaction Log of relevant processes for the United Kingdom relating to free allocation, auctioning and the exchange of international credits (C(2018) 8707).

The website of the Commission on the EU ETS (https://ec.europa.eu/clima/policies/ets_en) provide
general information in this regard. These pages will be updated with further information, where necessary.
European Commission
irectorate
eneral Climate Action
EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL CLIMATE ACTION
Brussels, 19 December 2018 Rev1
OTICE TO STAKEHOLDER
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND EU RULES ON FLUORINATED GREENHOUSE GASES The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. This means that as from 30 March 2019, 00:00h (CET)
the United Kingdom will be a third country
Preparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for EU and national authorities but also for private parties.  In view of the uncertainties surrounding the ratification of the Withdrawal Agreement, all interested parties, and especially economic operators, are reminded of legal repercussions, which need to be considered when the United Kingdom becomes a third country
Subject to the transition period provided for in the draft Withdrawal Agreement,
as of the withdrawal date, the EU rules on fluorinated gases, and in particular, Regulation (EU) No 517/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 April 2014 on fluorinated greenhouse gases
will no longer apply to the United Kingdom. This has in particular the following consequences:

n accordance with Article 50(3) of the Treaty on European Union, the European Council, in agreement with the United Kingdom, may unanimously decide that the Treaties cease to apply at a later date.
A third country is a country not member of the EU.
Cf. Part four of the draft Agreement on the withdrawal of the United Kingdom of Great Bri
in and Northern Ireland from the European Union and the European Atomic Energy Community, as agreed at negotiator's level on 14 November 2018 (https://ec.europa.eu/commission/publications/draft-agreement-withdrawal-uk-eu-agreed-negotiators-level-14-november-2018-including-text-article-132_en)
OJ L 150, 20.5.2014, p. 195
2 1.
UOTA ALLOCATION FOR HYDROFLUOROCARBONS According to Regulation (EU) No 517/2014, the placing on the market of hydrofluorocarbons is limited through quotas allocated by the Commission for each producer and importer in accordance with Article 16(5).
As of the withdrawal date, hydrofluorocarbons placed on the market of the United Kingdom are no longer within the scope of Regulation (EU) No 517/2014 and do no longer count towards the quota allocated by the Commission to producers and importers
As part of its preparedness measures, the Commission has amended UK companies' reference values to exclude the share related to the UK domestic activities

2.
EPORTING ON FLUORINATED GASES
According to Article 19(1) of Regulation (EU) No 517/2014, producers, importers and exporters of fluorinated greenhouse gases and gases listed in Annex II have to report annually, by 31 March, certain data. This obligation also applies to undertakings established in third countries and exporting fluorinated greenhouse gases and gases listed in Annex II to the EU acting through an EU-based "only representative
9 As of the withdrawal date,   undertakings established in the United Kingdom exporting fluorinated greenhouse gases and gases listed in Annex II to the EU are undertakings from a third country. As regards their trade in fluorinated gases with the Union, these undertakings will have to report the relevant data required by Regulation (EU) No 517/2014 through an EU-based only representative; and
The quotas for incumbent companies for the period until 31 December 2020 are calculated on the basis of reference values set in Commission Implementing Decision (EU) 2017/1984 of 24 October 2017 determining, pursuant to Regulation (EU) No 517/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council on fluorinated greenhouse gases, reference values for the period 1 January 2018 to 31 December 2020 for each producer or importer which has lawfully placed on the market hydrofluorocarbons from 1 January 2015 as reported under that Regulation, OJ L 287, 4.11.2017, p. 4
6
Commission Implementing Decision (EU) 2018/2023 of 17 December 2018 on amending Commission Implementing Decision (EU) 2017/1984 determining, pursuant to Regulation (EU) No 517/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council on fluorinated greenhouse gases, reference values as regards reference values for the period from 30 March 2019 to 31 December 2020 for producers or importers established within the United Kingdom, which have lawfully placed on the market hydrofluorocarbons from 1 January 2015, as reported under that Regulation (OJ L 323, 19.12.2018, p. 32). See also section 5 (subsection "EU climate policy") and Annex 2 of Commission Communication "Preparing for the withdrawal of the United Kingdom from the European Union on 30 March 2019: a Contingency Action Plan", COM(2018)880, 13 November 2018.
This share was determined in a dedicated data collection exercise carried out between 18 January and 18 May 2018 with companies holding a reference value and established in the United Kingdom.
It is recalled that, if the Withdrawal Agreement is ratified by the EU and the United Kingdom, its Articl
96(3) provides that Article 19 of Regulation (EU) No 517/2014 continues to apply to and in the United Kingdom in respect of the reporting for the last year of the transition period.
See point 4 of this notice.
undertakings established in the EU-27 Member States have to report trade with entities in the United Kingdom as import to or export from the EU
Regarding the 2018 reporting period, stakeholders are strongly encouraged to report before the withdrawal date. According to Article 19(4) of Regulation (EU) No 517/2014, undertakings placing fluorinated greenhouse gases and gases listed in Annex II contained in products or equipment on the EU market have to report annually, by 31 March, certain data. As of the withdrawal date, undertakings established in the United Kingdom exporting such goods to the EU no longer report this data. Instead, this information will have to be reported by the EU-based importer placing the products or equipment on the market in the Union
Regarding the 2018 reporting period, stakeholders are strongly encouraged to report before the withdrawal date. According to Article 19(2
and (3) of Regulation (EU) No 517/2014, undertakings that destroyed or used a certain amount of fluorinated greenhouse gases as feedstock have to report this, annually, by 31 March, for the preceding calendar year. As of the withdrawal date, undertakings in the United Kingdom no longer have to report these activities. Regarding the 2018 reporting period, stakeholders are strongly encouraged to report before the withdrawal date. As part of its preparedness measures, the Commission has amended the format for reporting to ensure separate reporting of hydrofluorocarbons placed on the market in the United Kingdom and of the EU-27 market.10 3.
ERIFICATION REPORT
ACCREDITATION OF AUDITORS According to Article 19(6) of Regulation (EU) No 517/2014, producers, importers and exporters of fluorinated greenhouse gases shall make available verification reports, on request, to the competent authority of the Member State concerned and to the Commission
These verification report
shall be drawn up by an auditor accredited pursuant to Directive 2003/87/EC or by an auditor accredited to verify financial statements in accordance with the legislation of the concerned Member State.  In addition, according to Article 19(5) of Regulation (EU) No 517/2014, each importer of pre-charged equipment shall submit a verification document issued by accredited auditors, in accordance with Article 14 of Regulation (EU) No 517/2014
As of the withdrawal date, accreditations by the UK National Accreditation Body will no longer be valid in the EU.
10
Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2018/1992 of 14 December 2018 amending Implementing Regulation (EU) No 1191/2014 as regards the reporting of data referred to in Article 19 of Regulation (EU) No 517/2014 in respect of hydrofluorocarbons placed on the market in the United Kingdom and in the Union of 27 Member States, OJ L 320, 17.12.2018, p. 25
4 As a consequence, as of the withdrawal date, auditors accredited by the UK National Accreditation Body can no longer draw up verification report
for submission according to Article 19(5) and (6) of Regulation (EU) No 517/2014
4. "ONLY REPRESENTATIVE
IN CASE OF IMPORTS According to Article 16(5) of Regulation (EU) No 517/2014, the placing on the market of hydrofluorocarbons in the EU by a non-EU company requires an "only representative" established in the EU.  As of the withdrawal date, hydrofluorocarbons imported from the United Kingdom into the EU-27 by a company established in the United Kingdom require that an "only representative" established in the EU-27 is mandated
As of the withdrawal date, representatives established in the United Kingdom are no longer considered as "only representatives" for the purpose of imports of hydrofluorocarbons into the EU-27 from third countries
5.
ERTIFIED PERSONS AND UNDERTAKINGS  According to Article 4(1) and (2) of Regulation (EU) No 517/2014, operators of certain equipment that contains fluorinated greenhouse gases shall ensure that this equipment is checked for leaks. According to the second subparagraph of Article 4(2), certain of these checks have to be carried out by certified persons. According to Article 8(1) of Regulation (EU) No 517/2014, operators of certain stationary equipment or refrigeration units shall ensure the recovery of fluorinated greenhouse gases is carried out by natural persons holding a certificate. According to Article 8(3) of Regulation (EU) No 517/2014, the recovery of fluorinated greenhouse gases from air-conditioning equipment in road vehicles falling within the scope of Directive 2006/40/EC shall be carried out by persons with a training attestation. Pursuant to Article 10 of Regulation (EU) No 517/2014
EU Member States have to establish:  certification programmes for undertakings carrying out installation, servicing, maintenance, repair or decommissioning of the equipment listed in points (a) to (d) of Article 4(2) for other parties;  certification programmes for natural persons carrying out those activities; and
training programmes for natural persons recovering fluorinated greenhouse gases from air-conditioning equipment in motor vehicles falling within the scope of Directive 2006/40/EC
According to the second subparagraph of Article 10(10), the certificates and training attestations issued in one Member State are mutually recognised for activities carried out in other EU Member States.
As of the withdrawal date, certificates and training attestations issued in the United Kingdom are no longer recognised for activities carried out in the EU-27.  The website of the Commission on the fluorinated gases (https://ec.europa.eu/clima/policies/f-gas_en) provide
general information in this regard. These pages will be updated with further information, where necessary.
European Commission
irectorate
eneral Climate Action
EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL FOR COMMUNICATION NETWORKS,
ONTENT AND TECHNOLOGY
Brussels, 7 March 2018
OTICE TO STAKEHOLDER
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND EU LEGISLATION IN THE FIELD OF ELECTRONIC COMMERCE AND NET NEUTRALITY The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. This means that
unless a ratified withdrawal agreement
establishes another date, all Union primary and secondary law will cease to apply to the United Kingdom from 30 March 2019, 00:00h (CET) ('the withdrawal date').
The United Kingdom will then become a 'third country'.
Preparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for EU and national authorities but also for private parties.  In view of the considerable uncertainties, in particular concerning the content of a possible withdrawal agreement, stakeholders are reminded of legal repercussions, which need to be considered when the United Kingdom becomes a third country
Subject to any transitional arrangement that may be contained in a possible withdrawal agreement, as of the withdrawal date, EU legislation in the field of the provision of information society services, in particular Directive 2000/31/EC (Directive on electronic commerce)
and Regulation (EU) 2015/2120 on open internet
will no longer apply to the United Kingdom. This has in particular the following consequences: 1.
OUNTRY-OF-ORIGIN PRINCIPLE
ELECTRONIC COMMERCE
In accordance with the internal market clause (also referred to as country-of-origin principle) of Article 3 of the Directive on electronic commerce
a provider of information
Negotiations are ongoing with the United Kingdom with a view to reaching a withdrawal agreement.
Furthermore, in accordance with Article 50(3) of the Treaty on European Union, the European Council, in agreement with the United Kingdom, may unanimously decide that the Treaties cease to apply at a later date.
A third country is a country not member of the EU.
Directive 2000/31/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 8 June 2000 on certain legal aspects of information society services, in particular electronic commerce, in the Internal Market ('Directive on electronic commerce'), OJ L 178, 17.7.2000, p. 1.
Regulation (EU) 2015/2120 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 November 2015 laying down measures concerning open internet access, OJ L 310, 26.11.2015.p. 1.
society services
is subject to the law of the EU Member State in which it is
stablished
and not to the various laws of the EU Member States where its services are provided, although the clause does allow for certain exemptions. The clause is complemented by a rule prohibiting prior authorisation schemes and similar requirements which apply specifically to providers of these services (Article 4 of the Directive on electronic commerce). Furthermore, the Directive sets out certain basic requirements on information to be provided to users, online contracting and online commercial communications (Articles 5-11 of the Directive on electronic commerce)
The liability of intermediary service providers is restricted in certain cases (Section 4 of the Directive on electronic commerce)  As of the withdrawal date, information society service providers established in the United Kingdom and providing information society services into the EU will no longer be able to rely on the country-of-origin principle and said rule precluding prior authorisation schemes
The basic information requirements set out in the Directive on electronic commerce no longer apply to them. As a consequence, companies established in the United Kingdom providing information society services into the EU will fall under the jurisdiction of each individual EU-27 Member State. Each EU-27 Member State will be entitled to subject the provision of such services to its national rules, including, for instance, prior authorisation scheme
or rules on information to be provided to users
Moreover, the limitations of liability set out in the Directive on electronic commerce no longer apply to intermediary service providers established in the United Kingdom. 2.
ET NEUTRALITY Regulation (EU) 2015/2120 on open internet provides for common rules on equal and non-discriminatory treatment of traffic in the provision of internet access services and related end-users' rights. While these rules will, as of the withdrawal date, no longer apply to the United Kingdom, they will continue to govern the provision of internet access services into the EU-27, no matter where the information society service provider is established. The website of the Commission https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/e-commerce-directive provide
general information concerning
commerce and information society services. This page will be updated with further information on the United Kingdom's withdrawal, where necessary. European Commission
irectorate
eneral for Communication Networks, Content and Technology
Information society service is defined as "any service normally provided for remuneration, at a distance, by electronic means and at the individual request of a recipient of services" (see Article 1(1)(b) of Directive (EU) 2015/1535 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 9 September 2015 laying down a procedure for the provision of information in the field of technical regulations and of rules on Information Society services OJ L 241, 17.9.2015, p. 1). Examples of services covered by the Directive on electronic commerce include online information services (such as online newspapers), online selling of products and services (books, financial services and travel services), online advertising, professional services (lawyers, doctors, estate agents), entertainment services and basic intermediary services (access to the Internet and transmission and hosting of information). These services include also services provided free of charge to the recipient and funded, for example, by advertising or sponsorship.
EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL FOR COMMUNICATIONS NETWORKS, CONTENT AND TECHNOLOGY
Brussels, 12 March 2018 Rev1
OTICE TO STAKEHOLDER
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND EU RULES IN THE FIELD OF  SECURITY OF NETWORK AND INFORMATION SYSTEMS The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. This means that
unless a ratified withdrawal agreement
establishes another date, all Union primary and secondary law will cease to apply to the United Kingdom from 30 March 2019, 00:00h (CET) ('the withdrawal date').
The United Kingdom will then become a 'third country'.
Preparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for EU and national authorities but also for private parties. In view of the considerable uncertainties, in particular concerning the content of a possible withdrawal agreement, stakeholders and particularly the  operators potentially subject to the obligations of Directive (EU) 2016/1148 on the security of network and information systems
are reminded of legal repercussions, which need to be considered when the United Kingdom becomes a third country.  Subject to any transitional arrangement that may be contained in a possible withdrawal agreement,  as of the withdrawal date, the EU rules in the field of security of network and
Negotiations are ongoing with the United Kingdom with a view to reaching a withdrawal agreement.
Furthermore, in accordance with Article 50(3) of the Treaty on European Union, the European Council, in agreement with the United Kingdom, may unanimously decide that the Treaties cease to apply at a later date.
A third country is a country not member of the EU.
Directive (EU) 2016/1148 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 6 July 2016 concerning measures for a high common level of security of network and information systems across the Union
information systems no longer apply to the United Kingdom
This has in particular the following consequences on digital service providers
Article 16 of Directive (EU) 2016/1148 imposes on digital service providers some requirements on security and incident notification. In accordance with Article 17 of Directive (EU) 2016/1148, these requirements are subject to ex post supervisory control by the relevant national competent authorities as understood under Article 8 of Directive (EU) 2016/1148. Article 18 of Directive (EU) 2016/1148 provides for the rules on the jurisdiction for such supervisory activity:
here a digital service provider is established in the Union, it will be, pursuant to Article 18(1) of Directive (EU) 2016/1148, subject to the jurisdiction of the Member State where it has its main establishment, which in principle corresponds to the place where the provider has its head office in the Union

here a digital service provider
is no
established in the Union but offer
digital services into the Union, it must, in accordance with Article 18(2) of Directive (EU) 2016/1148
designate a representative in the Union
Pursuant to Article 4(10) of Directive (EU) 2016/1148, a representative means any natural or legal person established in the Union explicitly designated to act on behalf of a digital service provider not established in the Union with regard to the latter's obligations under this Directive. The designation of a representative by the digital service provider shall be without prejudice to legal actions which could be initiated against the digital service provider itself, as provided for under Article 18(3) of Directive (EU) 2016/1148
As of the withdrawal date, a digital service provider subject to the jurisdiction of the United Kingdom before the withdrawal date because its main establishment in the EU was in the United Kingdom may be subject to the following:  If the digital service provider maintains one or several establishments in the EU27 Member States, it will be deemed to be under the jurisdiction of the EU27 Member State where it has its main establishment in the EU27, thus effectively resulting in a change of competent authority;  If the digital service provider is no longer established in the EU27 but offers digital services into the EU27, it will be subject to the obligation to designate a representative in an EU27 Member State in accordance with Article 18(2), as described above. Moreover, a digital service provider neither established in the EU27 nor in the United Kingdom but subject to the jurisdiction of the United Kingdom before the withdrawal
Member States are required to transpose the Directive (EU) 2016/1148 by 9 May 2018
They are also required to identify, by 9 November 2018, the Operators of Essential Services active in the sectors of energy, transport, banking, financial market infrastructures, health, drinking water supply and distribution and digital infrastructure (cf. Article 5 for this obligation and Article 4(4) for a definition of Operators of Essential Services
6
Directive (EU) 2016/1148 defines 'digital service provider' as any legal person that provides a digital service (cf. Article 4(6))
The digital services covered by the Directive are online marketplace, online search engine and cloud computing services (cf. Article 4(5) and Annex III of Directive (EU) 2016/1148).
See also Recital (64) of Directive (EU) 2016/1148
3 date because it had designated a representative in the United Kingdom in accordance with Article 18(2) will, as of the withdrawal date, be subject to the obligation to designate a representative in an EU27 Member State where services are offered by that digital service provider in accordance with Article 18(2). Consequently, the national competent authority, as understood under Article
of Directive (EU) 2016/1148, of that Member State where the digital service provider concerned has either its main establishment or has designated a representative, will receive notifications of incidents taking place within the Union and will exercise ex post supervisory control.  The website of the Commission on cyber-security (https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/policies/cybersecurity) provide
general information concerning Directive (EU) 2016/1148. These pages will be updated with further information, where necessary.
European Commission
irectorate
eneral for Communications Networks, Content and Technology


EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL FOR COMMUNICATIONS NETWORKS, CONTENT AND TECHNOLOGY
Brussels, 12 March 2018
OTICE TO STAKEHOLDERS
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND EU RULES IN THE FIELD O
ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATIONS The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. This means that, unless a ratified withdrawal agreement
establishes another date, all Union primary and secondary law will cease to apply to the United Kingdom from 30 March 2019, 00:00h (CET) ('the withdrawal date').
The United Kingdom will then become a 'third country'.
Preparing for the withdrawal is not just a matter for EU and national authorities but also for private parties.  In view of the considerable uncertainties, in particular concerning the content of a possible withdrawal agreement, stakeholders are reminded of legal repercussions, which need to be considered when the United Kingdom becomes a third country. Subject to any transitional arrangement that may be contained in a possible withdrawal agreement, as of the withdrawal date, the EU rules in the field of electronic communications no longer apply to the United Kingdom. This regulatory framework includes
the provisions of the Framework Directive
the related Specific Directives
the
Negotiations are ongoing with the United Kingdom with a view to reaching a withdrawal agreement.
Furthermore, in accordance with Article 50(3) of the Treaty on European Union, the European Council, in agreement with the United Kingdom, may unanimously decide that the Treaties cease to apply at a later date.
A third country is a country not member of the EU.
Please note that this list is indicative of the provisions primarily covered by this Notice. It is intended for information purposes only and is therefore neither exhaustive nor binding.
Directive 2002/21/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 7 March 2002 on a common regulatory framework for electronic communications networks and services (Framework Directive), OJ L 108, 24.4.2002, p. 33.
Directive 2002/20/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 7 March 2002 (Authorisation Directive), OJ L 108, 24.2.2002, p
21; Directive 2002/19/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 7 March 2002 (Access Directive), OJ L 108, 24.2.2002, p.7
Directive 2002/22/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 7 March 2002 (Universal Service Directive), L 108, 24.2.2002, p
51; and Directive 2002/58/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 July
Radio Spectrum Decision
the BEREC Regulation
the Roaming Regulation
the Telecoms Single Market Regulation,10 as well as a number of Commission Recommendations on related matters concerning the identification of markets which are susceptible to regulatory intervention11 and the proposed methodology for setting termination rates for voice calls.12
This has in particular the following consequences in the different area
of electronic communications: 1.
ENERAL AUTHORISATION Providers established in at least one EU Member State enjoy the right to provide electronic communications networks and services in all other Member States without being required to have an establishment there. They can start providing networks and services without any formal licensing process and are subject only to a
general authorisation
in each Member State where they provide networks or services (Article 3 of the Authorisation Directive). The general authorisation comprises rights and obligations for the provision of electronic communications networks and services and Member State
may only request a simple notification
without any standstill obligation (Article 4 of the Authorisation Directive)
As of the withdrawal date, providers of electronic communications networks and/or services established in the United Kingdom will cease to benefit from the general authorisation regime within the EU-27 Member States
Hence
EU-27 Member State
may impose additional authorisation requirements on providers established in the United Kingdom. Furthermore
providers established in the United Kingdom will cease to have the right to request providers authorised in the EU-27 Member States which are not 'major suppliers' (within the meaning of the GATS Reference Paper on                                                                                                                                                  2002 concerning the processing of personal data and the protection of privacy in the electronic communications sector (Directive on privacy and electronic communications), OJ L 201, 31.7.2002, p. 37
7
Decision No 676/2002/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 7 March 2002 on a regulatory framework for radio spectrum policy in the European Community (Radio Spectrum Decision), OJ L 108, 24.4.2002, p. 1.
Regulation (EC) No 1211/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 November 2009 establishing the Body of European Regulators for Electronic Communications (BEREC) and the Office, OJ L 337, 18.12.2009, p.
.
Regulation (EU) No 531/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 June 2012 on roaming on public mobile communications networks within the Union, OJ L 172, 30.6.2012, p. 10
10
Regulation (EU) 2015/2120 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 November 2015 laying down measures concerning open internet access, OJ L 310, 26.11.2015, p.
. 11
Commission Recommendation 2014/710/EU of 9 October 2014 on relevant product and service markets within the electronic communications sector susceptible to ex ante regulation in accordance with Directive 2002/21/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council on a common regulatory framework for electronic communications networks and services (Recommendation on Relevant Markets), OJ L 295, 11.10.2014, p. 79. 12
Commission Recommendation 2009/396/EC of 7 May 2009 on the Regulatory Treatment of Fixed and Mobile Termination Rates in the EU, (Recommendation on Termination Rates), OJ L 124 20.5.2009, p. 67
3 Telecommunications Services) to negotiate access and interconnection
Moreover, they will not have the right to request or be subject to the dispute resolution procedure within the EU, neither for disputes within a Member State nor for cross-border access disputes.
2.
IXED AND MOBILE TERMINATION RATES  As of the withdrawal date, the EU's regulatory framework leading to low wholesale voice termination rates13 will no longer apply to EU service providers as regards calls between the EU and the United Kingdom. This may lead to increases in the wholesale termination rates for calls from the EU to the United Kingdom and ultimately to increased retail tariffs for such calls. 3.
OAMING As of the withdrawal date the United Kingdom becomes a third country for the purposes of EU rules on roaming (Regulation (EU) 531/2012).
Providers of roaming services to roaming customers (hereafter 'roaming providers') operating in the EU:  will no longer benefit, when requesting wholesale roaming access, from the obligation of mobile network operators operating in the United Kingdom to meet all reasonable requests for providing wholesale roaming access (Article 3 of Regulation (EU) 531/2012);   will no longer benefit from the EU rules on maximum wholesale roaming charges that visited network operators operating in the United Kingdom may charge for the provision of wholesale roaming services within the EU (Articles 7, 9, 12 of Regulation (EU) 531/2012). Roaming customers of roaming providers operating in the EU:  will no longer benefit from the retail obligation of their roaming provider not to levy any surcharge in addition to the domestic retail price on the
for the use in the United Kingdom of roaming services (calls made or received, SMS messages sent and data services), subject to fair use (Article 6a of Regulation (EU) 531/2012); but  will continue to benefit from the transparency obligations laid down in Article 14 of Regulation (EU) 531/2012 (voice and SMS) and Article 15 of Regulation (EU) 531/2012 (data services) when travelling to the United Kingdom. Roaming providers operating in the United Kingdom:                                                  13
Wholesale termination rates are the charges paid between operators to deliver the calls to their customers. Wholesale termination rates are addressed in a Commission Recommendation of 2009, which recommends a costing methodology for setting regulated termination rates (Commission Recommendation 2009/396/EC of 7 May 2009 on the Regulatory Treatment of Fixed and Mobile Termination Rates in the EU, OJ L 124, 20.5.2009, p. 67). Despite the non-binding nature of the Commission Recommendation of 2009
it is followed by most Member States and the Court of Justice has confirmed that a national competent authority may depart from a recommended approach only where it appears to the national competent authority, in its assessment of a given situation
that the recommended approach is not appropriate to the specific national circumstances and has to give a reasoned justification for its position. See the judgment in Case C28/15, paragraph 38
4  will no longer benefit, when requesting wholesale roaming access, from the obligation of mobile network operators operating in the EU to meet all reasonable requests for providing wholesale roaming access (Article 3 of Regulation (EU) 531/2012);   will no longer benefit from the EU rules on maximum wholesale roaming charges that visited network operators operating in the EU may charge for the provision of wholesale roaming services within the EU (Articles 7, 9, 12 of Regulation (EU) 531/2012).  Roaming customers of roaming providers operating in the United Kingdom:  will no longer benefit from the EU rules on the retail obligation of their roaming provider not to levy any surcharge in addition to the domestic retail price on the
for the use within the EU of roaming services (calls made or received, SMS messages sent and data services), subject to fair use (Article 6a of Regulation (EU) 531/2012); and  will no longer benefit from the EU rules on the transparency obligations laid down in Article 14 of Regulation (EU) 531/2012 (voice and SMS) and Article 15 of Regulation (EU) 531/2012 (data services) when travelling to the EU. The website of the Commission on the Digital Single Market provides general information concerning the Commission proposal for a Directive establishing a European Electronic Communications Code (https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/news/proposed-directive-establishing-european-electronic-communications-code ) and roaming (https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/roaming).
European Commission Directorate-General for Communications networks, Content and Technology
& /en
& /en
PREAMBLE
THE EUROPEAN UNION AND THE EUROPEAN ATOMIC ENERGY COMMUNITY
AND
THE UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND,
CONSIDERING that on 29 March 2017 the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
United Kingdom"), following the outcome of a referendum held in the United Kingdom and its sovereign decision to leave the European Union, notified its intention to withdraw from the European Union ("Union") and the European Atomic Energy Community ("Euratom") in accordance with Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union ("TEU"), which applies to Euratom by virtue of Article 106a of the Treaty establishing the European Atomic Energy Community
Euratom Treaty"),
WISHING to set out the arrangements for the withdrawal of the United Kingdom from the Union and Euratom, taking account of the framework for their future relationship,
NOTING the guidelines of 29 April and 15 December 2017 and of 23 March 2018 provided by the European Council in the light of which the Union is to conclude the Agreement setting out the arrangements for the withdrawal of the United Kingdom from the Union and Euratom,
& /en
RECALLING that, pursuant to Article 50 TEU, in conjunction with Article 106a of the Euratom Treaty, and subject to the arrangements laid down in this Agreement, the law of the Union and of Euratom in its entirety cease
to apply to the United Kingdom from the date of entry into force of this Agreement,
STRESSING that the objective of this Agreement is to ensure an orderly withdrawal of the United Kingdom from the Union and Euratom,
RECOGNISING that it is necessary to provide reciprocal protection for Union citizens and for United Kingdom nationals, as well as their respective family members, where they have exercised free movement rights before a date set in this Agreement, and to ensure that their rights under this Agreement are enforceable and based on the principle of non-discrimination; recognising also that rights deriving from periods of social security insurance should be protected,
RESOLVED to ensure an orderly withdrawal through various separation provisions aiming to prevent disruption and to provide legal certainty to citizens and economic operators as well as to judicial and administrative authorities in the Union and in the United Kingdom, while not excluding the possibility of relevant separation provisions being superseded by the agreement(s) on the future relationship,
& /en
CONSIDERING that it is in the interest of both the Union and the United Kingdom to determine a transition or implementation period during which  notwithstanding all consequences of the United Kingdom's withdrawal from the Union as regards the United Kingdom's participation in the institutions, bodies, offices and agencies of the Union, in particular the end, on the date of entry into force of this Agreement, of the mandates of all members of institutions, bodies and agencies of the Union nominated, appointed or elected in relation to the United Kingdom's membership of the Union  Union law , including international agreements, should be applicable to and in the United Kingdom, and, as a general rule, with the same effect as regards the Member States, in order to avoid disruption in the period during which the agreement(s) on the future relationship will be negotiated,
RECOGNISING that, even if Union law will be applicable to and in the United Kingdom during the transition period, the specificities of the United Kingdom as a State having withdrawn from the Union mean that it will be important for the United Kingdom to be able to take steps to prepare and establish new international arrangements of its own, including in areas of Union exclusive competence, provided such agreements do not enter into force or apply during that period, unless so authorised by the Union,
RECALLING that the Union and the United Kingdom have agreed to honour the mutual commitments undertaken while the United Kingdom was a member of the Union through a single financial settlement,
& /en
CONSIDERING that in order to guarantee the correct interpretation and application of this Agreement and compliance with the obligations under this Agreement, it is essential to establish provisions ensuring overall governance, in particular binding dispute-settlement and enforcement rules that fully respect the autonomy of the respective legal orders of the Union and of the United Kingdom as well as the United Kingdom's status as a third country,
ACKNOWLEDGING that, for an orderly withdrawal of the United Kingdom from the Union, it is also necessary to establish, in separate protocols to this Agreement, durable arrangements addressing the very specific situations relating to Ireland/Northern Ireland and to the Sovereign Base Areas in Cyprus,
ACKNOWLEDGING further that, for an orderly withdrawal of the United Kingdom from the Union, it is also necessary to establish, in a separate protocol to this Agreement, the specific arrangements in respect of Gibraltar applicable in particular during the transition period,
UNDERLINING that this Agreement is founded on an overall balance of benefits, rights and obligations for the Union and the United Kingdom,
NOTING that in parallel with this Agreement, the Parties have made [precise Title of the JPD],
CONSIDERING that there is a need for both the United Kingdom and the Union to take all necessary steps to begin as soon as possible after 29 March 2019 the formal negotiations of one or several agreements governing their future relationship with a view to ensuring that, to the extent possible, those agreements apply from the end of the transition period,
HAVE AGREED AS FOLLOWS:
& /en
PART ONE
COMMON PROVISIONS
ARTICLE
Objective
This Agreement sets out the arrangements for the withdrawal of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland ("United Kingdom") from the European Union ("Union") and from the European Atomic Energy Community ("Euratom").
& /en
ARTICLE
Definitions
For the purposes of this Agreement, the following definitions shall apply:
(a) "Union law" means:
(i) the Treaty on European Union ("TEU"), the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union ("TFEU") and the Treaty establishing the European Atomic Energy Community ("Euratom Treaty"), as amended or supplemented, as well as the Treaties of Accession and the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union, together referred to as "the Treaties
(ii) the general principles of the Union's law;
(iii) the acts adopted by the institutions, bodies, offices or agencies of the Union;
(iv) the international agreements to which the Union is party and the international agreements concluded by the Member States acting on behalf of the Union;
& /en
(v) the agreements between Member States entered into in their capacity as Member States of the Union;
(vi) acts of the Representatives of the Governments of the Member States meeting within the European Council or the Council of the European Union ("Council");
(vii) the declarations made in the context of intergovernmental conferences which adopted the Treaties;
(b) "Member States" means the Kingdom of Belgium, the Republic of Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, the Kingdom of Denmark, the Federal Republic of Germany, the Republic of Estonia, Ireland, the Hellenic Republic, the Kingdom of Spain, the French Republic, the Republic of Croatia, the Italian Republic, the Republic of Cyprus, the Republic of Latvia, the Republic of Lithuania, the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg, Hungary, the Republic of Malta, the Kingdom of the Netherlands, the Republic of Austria, the Republic of Poland, the Portuguese Republic, Romania, the Republic of Slovenia, the Slovak Republic, the Republic of Finland and the Kingdom of Sweden;
(c) "Union citizen" means any person holding the nationality of a Member State;
& /en
(d) "United Kingdom national" means a national of the United Kingdom, as defined in the New Declaration by the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland of 31 December 1982 on the definition of the term
nationals
together with Declaration No 63 annexed to the Final Act of the intergovernmental conference which adopted the Treaty of Lisbon
(e)
transition period
means the period provided in Article 126;
(f) "day" means a calendar day, unless otherwise provided in this Agreement or in provisions of Union law made applicable by this Agreement .
ARTICLE
Territorial scope
1. Unless otherwise provided in this Agreement or in Union law made applicable by this Agreement, any reference in this Agreement to the United Kingdom or its territory shall be understood as referring to:
(a) the United Kingdom;

OJ C 23, 28.1.1983, p. 1.
OJ C 306, 17.12.2007, p. 270.
& /en 10 (b) Gibraltar, to the extent that Union law was applicable to it before the date of entry into force of this Agreement;
(c) the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man, to the extent that Union law was applicable to them before the date of entry into force of this Agreement;
(d) the Sovereign Base Areas of Akrotiri and Dhekelia in Cyprus, to the extent necessary to ensure the implementation of the arrangements set out in the Protocol on the Sovereign Base Areas of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland in Cyprus annexed to the Act concerning the conditions of accession of the Czech Republic, the Republic of Estonia, the Republic of Cyprus, the Republic of Latvia, the Republic of Lithuania, the Republic of Hungary, the Republic of Malta, the Republic of Poland, the Republic of Slovenia and the Slovak Republic to the European Union;
(e) the overseas countries and territories listed in Annex II to the TFEU having special relations with the United Kingdom1, where the provisions of this Agreement relate to the special arrangements for the association of the overseas countries and territories with the Union.

Anguilla, Bermuda, British Antarctic Territory, British Indian Ocean Territory, British Virgin Islands, Cayman Islands, Falkland Islands, Montserrat, Pitcairn, Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha, South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands, and Turks and Caicos Islands
& /en 11 2. Unless otherwise provided in this Agreement or in Union law made applicable by this Agreement, any reference in this Agreement to Member States, or their territory, shall be understood as covering the territories of the Member States to which the Treaties apply as provided in Article 355 TFEU.
ARTICLE
Methods and principles relating to the effect,  the implementation and the application of this Agreement
1. The provisions of this Agreement and the provisions of Union law made applicable by this Agreement shall produce in respect of and in the United Kingdom the same legal effects as those which they produce within the Union and its Member States.
Accordingly, legal or natural persons shall in particular be able to rely directly on the provisions contained or referred to in this Agreement which meet the conditions for direct effect under Union law.
2. The United Kingdom shall ensure compliance with paragraph 1, including as regards the required powers of its judicial and administrative authorities to disapply inconsistent or incompatible domestic provisions, through domestic primary legislation.
& /en 12 3. The provisions of this Agreement referring to Union law or to concepts or provisions thereof shall be interpreted and applied in accordance with the methods and general principles of Union law.
4. The provisions of this Agreement referring to Union law or to concepts or provisions thereof shall in their implementation and application be interpreted in conformity with the relevant case law of the Court of Justice of the European Union handed down before the end of the transition period.
5. In the interpretation and application of this Agreement, the United Kingdom's judicial and administrative authorities shall have due regard to relevant case law of the Court of Justice of the European Union handed down after the end of the transition period.
ARTICLE
Good faith
The Union and the United Kingdom shall, in full mutual respect and good faith, assist each other in carrying out tasks which flow from this Agreement.
& /en 13 They shall take all appropriate measures, whether general or particular, to ensure fulfilment of the obligations arising from this Agreement and shall refrain from any measures which could jeopardise the attainment of the objectives of this Agreement.
This Article is without prejudice to the application of Union law pursuant to this Agreement, in particular the principle of sincere cooperation.
ARTICLE
References to Union law
1. With the exception of Parts Four and Five, unless otherwise provided in this Agreement all references in this Agreement to Union law shall be understood as references to Union law, including as amended or replaced, as applicable on the last day of the transition period.
2. Where in this Agreement reference is made to Union acts or provisions thereof, such reference shall, where relevant, be understood to include a reference to Union law or provisions thereof that, although replaced or superseded by the act referred to, continue to apply in accordance with that act.
& /en 14 3. For the purposes of this Agreement, references to provisions of Union law made applicable by this Agreement shall be understood to include references to the relevant Union acts supplementing or implementing those provisions.
ARTICLE
References to the Union and to Member States
1. For the purposes of this Agreement, all references to Member States and competent authorities of Member States in provisions of Union law made applicable by this Agreement shall be understood as including the United Kingdom and its competent authorities, except as regards:
(a) the nomination, appointment or election of members of the institutions, bodies, offices and agencies of the Union, as well as the participation in the decision-making and the attendance in the meetings of the institutions;
(b) the participation in the decision-making and governance of the bodies, offices and agencies of the Union;
& /en 15 (c) the attendance in the meetings of the committees referred to in Article 3(2) of Regulation (EU) No 182/2011 of the European Parliament and of the Council1, of Commission expert groups or of other similar entities, or in the meetings of expert groups or similar entities of bodies, offices and agencies of the Union, unless otherwise provided in this Agreement.
2. Unless otherwise provided in this Agreement, any reference to the Union shall be understood as including Euratom.
ARTICLE
Access to networks, information systems and databases
Unless otherwise provided in this Agreement, at the end of the transition period the United Kingdom shall cease to be entitled to access any network, any information system and any database established on the basis of Union law. The United Kingdom shall take appropriate measures to ensure that it does not access a network, information system or database which it is no longer entitled to access.

Regulation (EU) No 182/2011 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 February 2011 laying down the rules and general principles concerning mechanisms for control by Member States of the Commission's exercise of implementing powers (OJ
55, 28.2.2011, p. 13).
& /en 16 PART TWO
CITIZENS
RIGHTS
TITLE
GENERAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE
Definitions
For the purposes of this Part, and without prejudice to Title III, the following definitions shall apply:
(a) "family members" means the following persons, irrespective of their nationality, who fall within the personal scope provided for in Article 10 of this Agreement:
(i) family members of Union citizens or family members of United Kingdom nationals as defined in point (2) of Article 2 of Directive 2004/38/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council

Directive 2004/38/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 29 April 2004 on the right of citizens of the Union and their family members to move and reside freely within the territory of the Member States amending Regulation (EEC) No 1612/68 and repealing Directives 64/221/EEC, 68/360/EEC, 72/194/EEC, 73/148/EEC, 75/34/EEC, 75/35/EEC, 90/364/EEC, 90/365/EEC and 93/96/EEC (OJ L 158, 30.4.2004, p. 77).
& /en 17 (ii) persons other than those defined in Article 3(2) of Directive 2004/38/EC whose presence is required by Union citizens or United Kingdom nationals in order not to deprive those Union citizens or United Kingdom nationals of a right of residence granted by this Part;
(b) "frontier workers" means Union citizens or United Kingdom nationals who pursue an economic activity in accordance with Article 45 or 49 TFEU in one or more States in which they do not reside;
(c) "host State" means:
(i) in respect of Union citizens and their family members, the United Kingdom, if they exercised their right of residence there in accordance with Union law before the end of the transition period and continue to reside there thereafter;
(ii) in respect of United Kingdom nationals and their family members, the Member State in which they exercised their right of residence in accordance with Union law before the end of the transition period and in which they continue to reside thereafter;
& /en 18 (d) "State of work" means:
(i) in respect of Union citizens, the United Kingdom, if they pursued an economic activity as frontier workers there before the end of the transition period and continue to do so thereafter;
(ii) in respect of United Kingdom nationals, a Member State in which they pursued an economic activity as frontier workers before the end of the transition period and in which they continue to do so thereafter;
(e) "rights of custody" means rights of custody within the meaning of point (9) of Article 2 of Council Regulation (EC) No 2201/20031, including rights of custody acquired by judgment, by operation of law or by an agreement having legal effect.

Council Regulation (EC) No 2201/2003 of 27 November 2003 concerning jurisdiction and the recognition and enforcement of judgments in matrimonial matters and the matters of parental responsibility, repealing Regulation (EC) No 1347/2000 (OJ L 338, 23.12.2003 p. 1).
& /en 19 ARTICLE 10
Personal scope
1. Without prejudice to Title III, this Part shall apply to the following persons:
(a) Union citizens who exercised their right to reside in the United Kingdom in accordance with Union law before the end of the transition period and continue to reside there thereafter;
(b) United Kingdom nationals who exercised their right to reside in a Member State in accordance with Union law before the end of the transition period and continue to reside there thereafter;
(c) Union citizens who exercised their right as frontier workers in the United Kingdom in accordance with Union law before the end of the transition period and continue to do so thereafter;
(d) United Kingdom nationals who exercised their right as frontier workers in one or more Member States in accordance with Union law before the end of the transition period and continue to do so thereafter;
& /en 20 (e) family members of the persons referred to in points (a) to (d), provided that they fulfil one of the following conditions:
(i) they resided in the host State in accordance with Union law before the end of the transition period and continue to reside there thereafter;
(ii) they were directly related to a person referred to in points (a) to (d) and resided outside the host State before the end of the transition period, provided that they fulfil the conditions set out in point (2) of Article 2 of Directive 2004/38/EC at the time they seek residence under this Part in order to join the person referred to in points (a) to (d) of this paragraph;
(iii) they were born to, or legally adopted by, persons referred to in points (a) to (d) after the end of the transition period, whether inside or outside the host State, and fulfil the conditions set out in point (2)(c) of Article 2 of Directive 2004/38/EC at the time they seek residence under this Part in order to join the person referred to in points (a) to (d) of this paragraph and fulfil one of the following conditions:
both parents are persons referred to in points (a) to (d);
& /en 21  one parent is a person referred to in points (a) to (d) and the other is a national of the host State; or
one parent is a person referred to in points (a) to (d) and has sole or joint rights of custody of the child, in accordance with the applicable rules of family law of a Member State or of the United Kingdom, including applicable rules of private international law under which rights of custody established under the law of a third State are recognised in the Member State or in the United Kingdom, in particular as regards the best interests of the child, and without prejudice to the normal operation of such applicable rules of private international law
(f) family members who resided in the host State in accordance with Articles 12 and 13, Article 16(2) and Articles 17 and 18 of Directive 2004/38/EC before the end of the transition period and continue to reside there thereafter.

The notion of rights of custody is to be interpreted in accordance with point (9) of Article 2 of Regulation (EC) No 2201/2003. Therefore, it covers rights of custody acquired by judgment, by operation of law or by an agreement having legal effect.
& /en 22 2. Persons falling under points (a) and (b) of Article 3(2) of Directive 2004/38/EC whose residence was facilitated by the host State in accordance with its national legislation before the end of the transition period in accordance with Article 3(2) of that Directive shall retain their right of residence in the host State in accordance with this Part, provided that they continue to reside in the host State thereafter.
3. Paragraph 2 shall also apply to persons falling under points (a) and (b) of Article 3(2) of Directive 2004/38/EC who have applied for facilitation of entry and residence before the end of the transition period, and whose residence is being facilitated by the host State in accordance with its national legislation thereafter.
4. Without prejudice to any right to residence which the persons concerned may have in their own right, the host State shall, in accordance with its national legislation and in accordance with point (b) of Article 3(2) of Directive 2004/38/EC, facilitate entry and residence for the partner with whom the person referred to in points (a) to (d) of paragraph 1 of this Article has a durable relationship, duly attested, where that partner resided outside the host State before the end of the transition period, provided that the relationship was durable before the end of the transition period and continues at the time the partner seeks residence under this Part.
5. In the cases referred to in paragraphs 3 and 4, the host State shall undertake an extensive examination of the personal circumstances of the persons concerned and shall justify any denial of entry or residence to such persons.
& /en 23 ARTICLE 11
Continuity of residence
Continuity of residence for the purposes of Articles 9 and 10 shall not be affected by absences as referred to in Article 15(2).
The right of permanent residence acquired under Directive 2004/38/EC before the end of the transition period shall not be treated as lost through absence from the host State for a period specified in Article 15(3).
ARTICLE 12
Non-discrimination
Within the scope of this Part, and without prejudice to any special provisions contained therein, any discrimination on grounds of nationality within the meaning of the first subparagraph of Article 18 TFEU shall be prohibited in the host State and the State of work in respect of the persons referred to in Article 10 of this Agreement.
& /en 24 TITLE II
RIGHTS AND OBLIGATIONS
CHAPTER 1
RIGHTS RELATED TO RESIDENCE, RESIDENCE DOCUMENTS
ARTICLE 13
Residence rights
1. Union citizens and United Kingdom nationals shall have the right to reside in the host State under the limitations and conditions as set out in Articles 21, 45 or 49 TFEU and in Article 6(1), points (a), (b) or (c) of Article 7(1), Article 7(3), Article 14, Article 16(1) or Article 17(1) of Directive 2004/38/EC.
& /en 25 2. Family members who are either Union citizens or United Kingdom nationals shall have the right to reside in the host State as set out in Article 21 TFEU and in Article 6(1), point (d) of Article 7(1), Article 12(1) or (3), Article 13(1), Article 14, Article 16(1) or Article 17(3) and (4) of Directive 2004/38/EC, subject to the limitations and conditions set out in those provisions.
3. Family members who are neither Union citizens nor United Kingdom nationals shall have the right to reside in the host State under Article 21 TFEU and as set out in Article 6(2), Article 7(2), Article 12(2) or (3), Article 13(2), Article 14, Article 16(2), Article 17(3) or (4) or Article 18 of Directive 2004/38/EC, subject to the limitations and conditions set out in those provisions.
4. The host State may not impose any limitations or conditions for obtaining, retaining or losing residence rights on the persons referred to in paragraphs 1, 2 and 3, other than those provided for in this Title. There shall be no discretion in applying the limitations and conditions provided for in this Title, other than in favour of the person concerned.
& /en 26 ARTICLE 14
Right of exit and of entry
1. Union citizens and United Kingdom nationals, their respective family members, and other persons, who reside in the territory of the host State in accordance with the conditions set out in this Title shall have the right to leave the host State and the right to enter it, as set out in Article 4(1) and the first subparagraph of Article 5(1) of Directive 2004/38/EC, with a valid passport or national identity card in the case of Union citizens and United Kingdom nationals, and with a valid passport in the case of their respective family members and other persons who are not Union citizens or United Kingdom nationals.
Five years after the end of the transition period, the host State may decide no longer to accept national identity cards for the purposes of entry to or exit from its territory if such cards do not include a chip that complies with the applicable International Civil Aviation Organisation standards related to biometric identification.
2. No exit visa, entry visa or equivalent formality shall be required of holders of a valid document issued in accordance with Article 18 or 26.
& /en 27 3. Where the host State requires family members who join the Union citizen or United Kingdom national after the end of the transition period to have an entry visa, the host State shall grant such persons every facility to obtain the necessary visas. Such visas shall be issued free of charge as soon as possible, and on the basis of an accelerated procedure.
ARTICLE 15
Right of permanent residence
1. Union citizens and United Kingdom nationals, and their respective family members, who have resided legally in the host State in accordance with Union law for a continuous period of
years or for the period specified in Article 17 of Directive 2004/38/EC, shall have the right to reside permanently in the host State under the conditions set out in Articles 16, 17 and 18 of Directive 2004/38/EC. Periods of legal residence or work in accordance with Union law before and after the end of the transition period shall be included in the calculation of the qualifying period necessary for acquisition of the right of permanent residence.
2. Continuity of residence for the purposes of acquisition of the right of permanent residence shall be determined in accordance with Article 16(3) and Article 21 of Directive 2004/38/EC.
& /en 28 3. Once acquired, the right of permanent residence shall be lost only through absence from the host State for a period exceeding 5 consecutive years.
ARTICLE 16
Accumulation of periods
Union citizens and United Kingdom nationals, and their respective family members, who before the end of the transition period resided legally in the host State in accordance with the conditions of Article 7 of Directive 2004/38/EC for a period of less than 5 years, shall have the right to acquire the right to reside permanently under the conditions set out in Article 15 of this Agreement once they have completed the necessary periods of residence. Periods of legal residence or work in accordance with Union law before and after the end of the transition period shall be included in the calculation of the qualifying period necessary for acquisition of the right of permanent residence.
& /en 29 ARTICLE 17
Status and changes
1. The right of Union citizens and United Kingdom nationals, and their respective family members, to rely directly on this Part shall not be affected when they change status, for example between student, worker, self-employed person and economically inactive person. Persons who, at the end of the transition period, enjoy a right of residence in their capacity as family members of Union citizens or United Kingdom nationals, cannot become persons referred to in points (a) to (d) of Article 10(1).
2. The rights provided for in this Title for the family members who are dependants of Union citizens or United Kingdom nationals before the end of the transition period, shall be maintained even after they cease to be dependants.
& /en 30 ARTICLE 18
Issuance of residence documents
1. The host State may require Union citizens or United Kingdom nationals, their respective family members and other persons, who reside in its territory in accordance with the conditions set out in this Title, to apply for a new residence status which confers the rights under this Title and a document evidencing such status which may be in a digital form.
Applying for such a residence status shall be subject to the following conditions:
(a) the purpose of the application procedure shall be to verify whether the applicant is entitled to the residence rights set out in this Title. Where that is the case, the applicant shall have a right to be granted the residence status and the document evidencing that status;
(b) the deadline for submitting the application shall not be less than 6 months from the end of the transition period, for persons residing in the host State before the end of the transition period.
For persons who have the right to commence residence after the end of the transition period in the host State in accordance with this Title, the deadline for submitting the application shall be 3 months after their arrival or the expiry of the deadline referred to in the first subparagraph, whichever is later.
& /en 31 A certificate of application for the residence status shall be issued immediately;
(c) the deadline for submitting the application referred to in point (b) shall be extended automatically by 1 year where the Union has notified the United Kingdom, or the United Kingdom has notified the Union, that technical problems prevent the host State either from registering the application or from issuing the certificate of application referred to in point (b). The host State shall publish that notification and shall provide appropriate public information for the persons concerned in good time;
(d) where the deadline for submitting the application referred to in point (b) is not respected by the persons concerned, the competent authorities shall assess all the circumstances and reasons for not respecting the deadline and shall allow those persons to submit an application within a reasonable further period of time if there are reasonable grounds for the failure to respect the deadline;
(e) the host State shall ensure that any administrative procedures for applications are smooth, transparent and simple, and that any unnecessary administrative burdens are avoided;
(f) application forms shall be short, simple, user friendly and adapted to the context of this Agreement; applications made by families at the same time shall be considered together;
& /en 32 (g) the document evidencing the status shall be issued free of charge or for a charge not exceeding that imposed on citizens or nationals of the host State for the issuing of similar documents;
(h) persons who, before the end of the transition period, hold a valid permanent residence document issued under Article 19 or 20 of Directive 2004/38/EC or hold a valid domestic immigration document conferring a permanent right to reside in the host State, shall have the right to exchange that document within the period referred to in point (b) of this paragraph for a new residence document upon application after a verification of their identity, a criminality and security check in accordance with point (p) of this paragraph and confirmation of their ongoing residence; such new residence documents shall be issued free of charge;
(i) the identity of the applicants shall be verified through the presentation of a valid passport or national identity card for Union citizens and United Kingdom nationals, and through the presentation of a valid passport for their respective family members and other persons who are not Union citizens or United Kingdom nationals; the acceptance of such identity documents shall not be made conditional upon any criteria other than that of the validity of the document. Where the identity document is retained by the competent authorities of the host State while the application is pending, the host State shall return that document upon application without delay, before the decision on the application has been taken;
& /en 33 (j) supporting documents other than identity documents, such as civil status documents, may be submitted in copy. Originals of supporting documents may be required only in specific cases where there is a reasonable doubt as to the authenticity of the supporting documents submitted;
(k) the host State may only require Union citizens and United Kingdom nationals to present, in addition to the identity documents referred to in point (i) of this paragraph, the following supporting documents as referred to in Article 8(3) of Directive 2004/38/EC:
(i) where they reside in the host State in accordance with point (a) of Article 7(1) of Directive 2004/38/EC as workers or self-employed, a confirmation of engagement from the employer or a certificate of employment, or proof that they are self-employed;
(ii) where they reside in the host State in accordance with point (b) of Article 7(1) of Directive 2004/38/EC as economically inactive persons, evidence that they have sufficient resources for themselves and their family members not to become a burden on the social assistance system of the host State during their period of residence and that they have comprehensive sickness insurance cover in the host State; or
& /en 34 (iii) where they reside in the host State in accordance with point (c) of Article 7(1) of Directive 2004/38/EC as students, proof of enrolment at an establishment accredited or financed by the host State on the basis of its legislation or administrative practice, proof of comprehensive sickness insurance cover, and a declaration or equivalent means of proof, that they have sufficient resources for themselves and their family members not to become a burden on the social assistance system of the host State during their period of residence. The host State may not require such declarations to refer to any specific amount of resources.
With regard to the condition of sufficient resources, Article 8(4) of Directive 2004/38/EC shall apply;
(l) the host State may only require family members who fall under point (e)(i) of Article 10(1) or Article 10(2) or (3) of this Agreement and who reside in the host State in accordance with point (d) of Article 7(1) or Article 7(2) of Directive 2004/38/EC to present, in addition to the identity documents referred to in point (i) of this paragraph, the following supporting documents as referred to in Article 8(5) or 10(2) of Directive 2004/38/EC:
(i) a document attesting to the existence of a family relationship or registered partnership;
& /en 35 (ii) the registration certificate or, in the absence of a registration system, any other proof that the Union citizen or the United Kingdom national with whom they reside actually resides in the host State;
(iii) for direct descendants who are under the age of 21 or who are dependants and dependent direct relatives in the ascending line, and for those of the spouse or registered partner, documentary evidence that the conditions set out in point (c) or (d) of Article 2(2) of Directive 2004/38/EC are fulfilled;
(iv) for the persons referred to in Article 10(2) or (3) of this Agreement, a document issued by the relevant authority in the host State in accordance with Article 3(2) of Directive 2004/38/EC.
With regard to the condition of sufficient resources as concerns family members who are themselves Union citizens or United Kingdom nationals, Article 8(4) of Directive 2004/38/EC shall apply;
& /en 36 (m) the host State may only require family members who fall under point (e)(ii) of Article 10(1) or Article 10(4) of this Agreement to present, in addition to the identity documents referred to in point (i) of this paragraph, the following supporting documents as referred to in Articles 8(5) and 10(2) of Directive 2004/38/EC:
(i) a document attesting to the existence of a family relationship or of a registered partnership;
(ii) the registration certificate or, in the absence of a registration system, any other proof of residence in the host State of the Union citizen or of the United Kingdom nationals whom they are joining in the host State;
(iii) for spouses or registered partners, a document attesting to the existence of a family relationship or a registered partnership before the end of the transition period;
(iv) for direct descendants who are under the age of 21 or who are dependants and dependent direct relatives in the ascending line and those of the spouse or registered partner, documentary evidence that they were related to Union citizens or United Kingdom nationals before the end of the transition period and fulfil the conditions set out in point (c) or (d) of Article 2(2) of Directive 2004/38/EC relating to age or dependence;
& /en 37 (v) for the persons referred to in Article 10(4) of this Agreement, proof that a durable relationship with Union citizens or United Kingdom nationals existed before the end of the transition period and continues to exist thereafter;
(n) for cases other than those set out in points (k), (l) and (m), the host State shall not require applicants to present supporting documents that go beyond what is strictly necessary and proportionate to provide evidence that the conditions relating to the right of residence under this Title have been fulfilled;
(o) the competent authorities of the host State shall help the applicants to prove their eligibility and to avoid any errors or omissions in their applications; they shall give the applicants the opportunity to furnish supplementary evidence and to correct any deficiencies, errors or omissions;
(p) criminality and security checks may be carried out systematically on applicants, with the exclusive aim of verifying whether the restrictions set out in Article 20 of this Agreement may be applicable. For that purpose, applicants may be required to declare past criminal convictions which appear in their criminal record in accordance with the law of the State of conviction at the time of the application. The host State may, if it considers this essential, apply the procedure set out in Article 27(3) of Directive 2004/38/EC with respect to enquiries to other States regarding previous criminal records;
& /en 38 (q) the new residence document shall include a statement that it has been issued in accordance with this Agreement;
(r) the applicant shall have access to judicial and, where appropriate, administrative redress procedures in the host State against any decision refusing to grant the residence status. The redress procedures shall allow for an examination of the legality of the decision, as well as of the facts and circumstances on which the proposed decision is based. Such redress procedures shall ensure that the decision is not disproportionate.
2. During the period referred to in point (b) of paragraph 1 of this Article and its possible one-year extension under point (c) of that paragraph, all rights provided for in this Part shall be deemed to apply to Union citizens or United Kingdom nationals, their respective family members, and other persons residing in the host State, in accordance with the conditions and subject to the restrictions set out in Article 20.
3. Pending a final decision by the competent authorities on any application referred to in paragraph 1, and pending a final judgment handed down in case of judicial redress sought against any rejection of such application by the competent administrative authorities, all rights provided for in this Part shall be deemed to apply to the applicant, including Article 21 on safeguards and right of appeal, subject to the conditions set out in Article 20(4).
& /en 39 4. Where a host State has chosen not to require Union citizens or United Kingdom nationals, their family members, and other persons, residing in its territory in accordance with the conditions set out in this Title, to apply for the new residence status referred to in paragraph 1 as a condition for legal residence, those eligible for residence rights under this Title shall have the right to receive, in accordance with the conditions set out in Directive 2004/38/EC, a residence document, which may be in a digital form, that includes a statement that it has been issued in accordance with this Agreement.
ARTICLE 19
Issuance of residence documents during the transition period
1. During the transition period, a host State may allow applications for a residence status or residence document as referred to in Article 18(1) and (4) to be made voluntarily from the date of entry into force of this Agreement.
2. Decisions to accept or refuse such applications shall be taken in accordance with Article 18(1) and (4). Decisions under Article 18(1) shall have no effect until after the end of the transition period.
& /en 40 3. If an application under Article 18(1) is accepted before the end of the transition period, the host State may not withdraw the decision granting the residence status before the end of the transition period on any grounds other than those set out in Chapter VI and Article 35 of Directive 2004/38/EC.
4. If an application is refused before the end of the transition period, the applicant may apply again at any time before the expiry of the period set out in point (b) of Article 18(1).
5. Without prejudice to paragraph 4, the redress procedures under point (r) of Article 18(1) shall be available from the date of any decision to refuse an application referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article
ARTICLE 20
Restrictions of the rights of residence and entry
1. The conduct of Union citizens or United Kingdom nationals, their family members, and other persons, who exercise rights under this Title, where that conduct occurred before the end of the transition period, shall be considered in accordance with Chapter VI of Directive 2004/38/EC.
& /en 41 2. The conduct of Union citizens or United Kingdom nationals, their family members, and other persons, who exercise rights under this Title, where that conduct occurred after the end of the transition period, may constitute grounds for restricting the right of residence by the host State or the right of entry in the State of work in accordance with national legislation.
3. The host State or the State of work may adopt the necessary measures to refuse, terminate or withdraw any right conferred by this Title in the case of the abuse of those rights or fraud, as set out in Article 35 of Directive 2004/38/EC. Such measures shall be subject to the procedural safeguards provided for in Article 21 of this Agreement.
4. The host State or the State of work may remove applicants who submitted fraudulent or abusive applications from its territory under the conditions set out in Directive 2004/38/EC, in particular Articles 31 and 35 thereof, even before a final judgment has been handed down in the case of judicial redress sought against any rejection of such an application.
ARTICLE 21
Safeguards and right of appeal
The safeguards set out in Article 15 and Chapter VI of Directive 2004/38/EC shall apply in respect of any decision by the host State that restricts residence rights of the persons referred to in Article 10 of this Agreement.
& /en 42 ARTICLE 22
Related rights
In accordance with Article 23 of Directive 2004/38/EC, irrespective of nationality, the family members of a Union citizen or United Kingdom national who have the right of residence or the right of permanent residence in the host State or the State of work shall be entitled to take up employment or self-employment there.
ARTICLE 23
Equal treatment
1. In accordance with Article 24 of Directive 2004/38/EC, subject to the specific provisions provided for in this Title and Titles I and IV of this Part, all Union citizens or United Kingdom nationals residing on the basis of this Agreement in the territory of the host State shall enjoy equal treatment with the nationals of that State within the scope of this Part. The benefit of this right shall be extended to those family members of Union citizens or United Kingdom nationals who have the right of residence or permanent residence.
& /en 43 2. By way of derogation from paragraph 1, the host State shall not be obliged to confer entitlement to social assistance during periods of residence on the basis of Article 6 or point (b) of Article 14(4) of Directive 2004/38/EC, nor shall it be obliged, prior to a person's acquisition of the right of permanent residence in accordance with Article 15 of this Agreement, to grant maintenance aid for studies, including vocational training, consisting in student grants or student loans to persons other than workers, self-employed persons, persons who retain such status or to members of their families.
& /en 44 CHAPTER 2
RIGHTS OF WORKERS AND SELF-EMPLOYED PERSONS
ARTICLE 24
Rights of workers
1. Subject to the limitations set out in Article 45(3) and (4) TFEU, workers in the host State and frontier workers in the State or States of work shall enjoy the rights guaranteed by Article 45 TFEU and the rights granted by Regulation (EU) No 492/2011 of the European Parliament and of the Council1. These rights include:
(a) the right not to be discriminated against on grounds of nationality as regards employment, remuneration and other conditions of work and employment;
(b) the right to take up and pursue an activity in accordance with the rules applicable to the nationals of the host State or the State of work;
(c) the right to assistance afforded by the employment offices of the host State or the State of work as offered to own nationals;

Regulation (EU) No 492/2011 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 5 April 2011 on freedom of movement for workers within the Union (OJ L 141, 27.5.2011, p. 1).
& /en 45 (d) the right to equal treatment in respect of conditions of employment and work, in particular as regards remuneration, dismissal and in case of unemployment, reinstatement or re-employment;
(e) the right to social and tax advantages;
(f) collective rights;
(g) the rights and benefits accorded to national workers in matters of housing;
(h) the right for their children to be admitted to the general educational, apprenticeship and vocational training courses under the same conditions as the nationals of the host State or the State of work, if such children are residing in the territory where the worker works.
2. Where a direct descendant of a worker who has ceased to reside in the host State is in education in that State, the primary carer for that descendant shall have the right to reside in that State until the descendant reaches the age of majority, and after the age of majority if that descendant continues to need the presence and care of the primary carer in order to pursue and complete his or her education.
& /en 46 3. Employed frontier workers shall enjoy the right to enter and exit the State of work in accordance with Article 14 of this Agreement and shall retain the rights they enjoyed as workers there, provided they are in one of the circumstances set out in points (a), (b), (c) and (d) of Article 7(3) of Directive 2004/38/EC, even where they do not move their residence to the State of work.
ARTICLE 25
Rights of self-employed persons
1. Subject to the limitations set out in Articles 51 and 52 TFEU, self-employed persons in the host State and self-employed frontier workers in the State or States of work shall enjoy the rights guaranteed by Articles 49 and 55 TFEU. These rights include:
(a) the right to take up and pursue activities as self-employed persons and to set up and manage undertakings under the conditions laid down by the host State for its own nationals, as set out in Article 49 TFEU;
(b) the rights as set out in points (c) to (h) of Article 24(1) of this Agreement.
2. Article 24(2) shall apply to direct descendants of self-employed workers.
3. Article 24(3) shall apply to self-employed frontier workers.
& /en 47 ARTICLE 26
Issuance of a document identifying frontier workers' rights
The State of work may require Union citizens and United Kingdom nationals who have rights as frontier workers under this Title to apply for a document certifying that they have such rights under this Title. Such Union citizens and United Kingdom nationals shall have the right to be issued with such a document.
& /en 48 CHAPTER 3
PROFESSIONAL QUALIFICATIONS
ARTICLE 27
Recognised professional qualifications
1. The recognition, before the end of the transition period, of professional qualifications, as defined in point (b) of Article 3(1) of Directive 2005/36/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council1, of Union citizens or United Kingdom nationals, and their family members, by their host State or their State of work shall maintain its effects in the respective State, including the right to pursue their profession under the same conditions as its nationals, where such recognition was made in accordance with any of the following provisions:
(a) Title III of Directive 2005/36/EC in respect of the recognition of professional qualifications in the context of the exercise of the freedom of establishment, whether such recognition fell under the general system for the recognition of evidence of training, the system for the recognition of professional experience or the system for the recognition on the basis of coordination of minimum training conditions;

Directive 2005/36/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 7 September 2005 on the recognition of professional qualifications (OJ L 255, 30.9.2005, p. 22).
& /en 49 (b) Article 10(1) and (3) of Directive 98/5/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council
in respect of gaining admission to the profession of lawyer in the host State or State of work;
(c) Article 14 of Directive 2006/43/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council
in respect of the approval of statutory auditors from another Member State;
(d) Council Directive 74/556/EEC
in respect of the acceptance of evidence of the knowledge and ability necessary to take up or pursue the activities of self-employed persons and of intermediaries engaging in the trade and distribution of toxic products or activities involving the professional use of toxic products.

Directive 98/5/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 February 1998 to facilitate practice of the profession of lawyer on a permanent basis in a Member State other than that in which the qualification was obtained (OJ L 77, 14.3.1998, p. 36).
Directive 2006/43/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 17 May 2006 on statutory audits of annual accounts and consolidated accounts, amending Council Directives 78/660/EEC and 83/349/EEC and repealing Council Directive 84/253/EEC (OJ L 157, 9.6.2006, p. 87).
Council Directive 74/556/EEC of 4 June 1974 laying down detailed provisions concerning transitional
easures relating to activities, trade in and distribution of toxic products and activities entailing the professional use of such products including activities of intermediaries (OJ L 307, 18.11.1974, p. 1).
& /en 50 2. Recognitions of professional qualifications for the purposes of point (a) of paragraph 1 of this Article shall include:
(a) recognitions of professional qualifications which have benefited from Article 3(3) of Directive 2005/36/EC;
(b) decisions granting partial access to a professional activity in accordance with Article 4f of Directive 2005/36/EC;
(c) recognitions of professional qualifications for establishment purposes made under Article 4d of Directive 2005/36/EC.
& /en 51 ARTICLE 28
Ongoing procedures on the recognition of professional qualifications
Article 4, Article 4d in respect of recognitions of professional qualifications for establishment purposes, Article 4f and Title III of Directive 2005/36/EC, Article 10(1), (3) and (4) of Directive 98/5/EC, Article 14 of Directive 2006/43/EC and Directive 74/556/EEC shall apply in respect of the examination by a competent authority of the host State or State of work of any application for the recognition of professional qualifications introduced before the end of the transition period by Union citizens or United Kingdom nationals and in respect of the decision on any such application.
Articles 4a, 4b and 4e of Directive 2005/36/EC shall also apply to the extent relevant for the completion of the procedures for the recognitions of professional qualifications for establishment purposes under Article 4d of that Directive.
& /en 52 ARTICLE 29
Administrative cooperation on recognition of professional qualifications
1. With regard to the pending applications referred to in Article 28, the United Kingdom and the Member States shall cooperate in order to facilitate the application of Article 28. Cooperation may include the exchange of information, including information on disciplinary action or criminal sanctions taken or any other serious and specific circumstances which are likely to have consequences for the pursuit of the activities falling under the Directives referred to in Article 28
2. By way of derogation from Article 8, for a period not exceeding 9 months from the end of the transition period, the United Kingdom shall be entitled to use the internal market information system in respect of applications referred to in Article 28 in so far as they concern procedures for the recognition of professional qualifications for establishment purposes under Article 4d of Directive 2005/36/EC.
& /en 53 TITLE III
COORDINATION OF SOCIAL SECURITY SYSTEMS
ARTICLE 30
Persons covered
1. This Title shall apply to the following persons:
(a) Union citizens who are subject to the legislation of the United Kingdom at the end of the transition period, as well as their family members and survivors;
(b) United Kingdom nationals who are subject to the legislation of a Member State at the end of the transition period, as well as their family members and survivors;
(c) Union citizens who reside in the United Kingdom and are subject to the legislation of a Member State at the end of the transition period, as well as their family members and survivors;
& /en 54 (d) United Kingdom nationals who reside in a Member State, and are subject to the legislation of the United Kingdom at the end of the transition period, as well as their family members and survivors;
(e) persons who do not fall within points (a) to (d) but are:
(i) Union citizens who pursue an activity as an employed or self-employed person in the United Kingdom at the end of the transition period, and who, based on Title II of Regulation (EC) No 883/2004 of the European Parliament and of the Council1, are subject to the legislation of a Member State, as well as their family members and survivors; or
(ii) United Kingdom nationals who pursue an activity as an employed or self-employed person in one or more Member States at the end of the transition period, and who, based on Title II of Regulation (EC) No 883/2004, are subject to the legislation of the United Kingdom, as well as their family members and survivors;
(f) stateless persons and refugees, residing in a Member State or in the United Kingdom, who are in one of the situations described in points (a) to (e), as well as their family members and survivors;

Regulation (EC) No 883/2004 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 29 April 2004 on the coordination of social security systems (OJ L 166, 30.4.2004, p. 1).
& /en 55 (g) nationals of third countries, as well as members of their families and survivors, who are in one of the situations described in points (a) to (e), provided that they fulfil the conditions of Council Regulation (EC) No 859/2003
2. The persons referred to in paragraph 1 shall be covered for as long as they continue without interruption to be in one of the situations set out in that paragraph involving both a Member State and the United Kingdom at the same time.
3. This Title shall also apply to persons who do not, or who no longer, fall within points (a) to (e) of paragraph 1 of this Article but who fall within Article 10 of this Agreement, as well as their family members and survivors.
4. The persons referred to in paragraph 3 shall be covered for as long as they continue to have a right to reside in the host State under Article 13 of this Agreement, or a right to work in their State of work under Article 24 or 25 of this Agreement.
5. Where this Article refers to family members and survivors, those persons shall be covered by this Title only to the extent that they derive rights and obligations in that capacity under Regulation (EC) No 883/2004.

Council Regulation (EC) No 859/2003 of 14 May 2003 extending the provisions of Regulation (EEC) No 1408/71 and Regulation (EEC) No 574/72 to nationals of third countries who are not already covered by those provisions solely on the ground of their nationality (OJ L 124, 20.5.2003, p. 1).
& /en 56 ARTICLE 31
Social security coordination rules
1. The rules and objectives set out in Article 48 TFEU, Regulation (EC) No 883/2004 and Regulation (EC) No 987/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council1, shall apply to the persons covered by this Title.
The Union and the United Kingdom shall take due account of the Decisions and Recommendations of the Administrative Commission for the Coordination of Social Security Systems attached to the European Commission, set up under Regulation (EC) No 883/2004 ("Administrative Commission") listed in Part I of Annex I to this Agreement.
2. By way of derogation from Article 9 of this Agreement, for the purposes of this Title, the definitions in Article 1 of Regulation (EC) No 883/2004 shall apply.

Regulation (EC) No 987/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 September 2009 laying down the procedure for implementing Regulation (EC) No 883/2004 on the coordination of social security systems (OJ L 284, 30.10.2009, p. 1).
& /en 57 3. With regard to nationals of third countries who fulfil the conditions of Regulation (EC) No 859/2003, as well as their family members or survivors within the scope of this Title, the references to Regulation (EC) No 883/2004 and Regulation (EC) No 987/2009 in this Title shall be understood as references to Council Regulation (EEC) No 1408/71
and Council Regulation (EEC) No 574/72
respectively. References to specific provisions of Regulation (EC) No 883/2004 and Regulation (EC) No 987/2009 shall be understood as references to the corresponding provisions of Regulation (EEC) No 1408/71 and Regulation (EEC) No 574/72.

Council Regulation (EEC) No 1408/71 of 14 June 1971 on the application of social security schemes to employed persons, to self-employed persons and to members of their families moving within the Community (OJ
149, 5.7.1971, p. 2).
Regulation (EEC) No 574/72 of the Council of 21 March 1972 fixing the procedure for implementing Regulation (EEC) No 1408/71 on the application of social security schemes to employed persons and their families moving within the Community (OJ L 74, 27.3.1972, p. 1).
& /en 58 ARTICLE 32
Special situations covered
1. The following rules shall apply in the following situations to the extent set out in this Article, insofar as they relate to persons not or no longer covered by Article 30:
(a) the following persons shall be covered by this Title for the purposes of reliance on and aggregation of periods of insurance, employment, self-employment or residence, including rights and obligations deriving from such periods in accordance with Regulation (EC) No 883/2004:
(i) Union citizens, as well as stateless persons and refugees residing in a Member State and nationals of third countries who fulfil the conditions of Regulation (EC) No 859/2003, who have been subject to the legislation of the United Kingdom before the end of the transition period, as well as their family members and survivors;
(ii) United Kingdom nationals, as well as stateless persons and refugees residing in the United Kingdom and nationals of third countries who fulfil the conditions of Regulation (EC) No 859/2003, who have been subject to the legislation of a Member State before the end of the transition period, as well as their family members and survivors;
& /en 59
or the purposes of the aggregation of periods, periods completed both before and after the end of the transition period shall be taken into account in accordance with Regulation (EC) No 883/2004;
(b) the rules set out in Articles 20 and 27 of Regulation (EC) No 883/2004 shall continue to apply to persons who, before the end of the transition period, had requested authorisation to receive a course of planned health care treatment pursuant to Regulation (EC) No 883/2004, until the end of the treatment. The corresponding reimbursement procedures shall also apply even after the treatment ends. Such persons and the accompanying persons shall enjoy the right to enter and exit the State of treatment in accordance with Article 14, mutatis mutandis
(c) the rules set out in Articles 19 and 27 of Regulation (EC) No 883/2004 shall continue to apply to persons who are covered by Regulation (EC) No 883/2004 and who are on a stay at the end of the transition period in a Member State or the United Kingdom, until the end of their stay. The corresponding reimbursement procedures shall also apply even after the stay or treatment ends;
& /en 60 (d) the rules set out in Articles 67, 68 and 69 of Regulation (EC) No 883/2004 shall continue to apply, for as long as the conditions are fulfilled, to awards of family benefits to which there is entitlement at the end of the transition period for the following persons:
(i) Union citizens, stateless persons and refugees residing in a Member State as well as nationals of third countries who fulfil the conditions of Regulation (EC) No 859/2003 and reside in a Member State, who are subject to the legislation of a Member State and have family members residing in the United Kingdom at the end of the transition period;
(ii) United Kingdom nationals, as well as stateless persons and refugees residing in the United Kingdom and nationals of third countries who fulfil the conditions of Regulation (EC) No 859/2003 and reside in the United Kingdom, who are subject to the legislation of the United Kingdom and have family members residing in a Member State at the end of the transition period;
(e) in the situations set out in point (d)(i) and (ii) of this paragraph, for any persons who have rights as family members at the end of the transition period under Regulation (EC) No 883/2004, such as derived rights for sickness benefits in kind, that Regulation and the corresponding provisions of Regulation (EC) No 987/2009 shall continue to apply for as long as the conditions provided therein are fulfilled.
& /en 61 2. The provisions of Chapter 1 of Title III of Regulation (EC) No 883/2004 as regards sickness benefits shall apply to persons receiving benefits under point (a) of paragraph 1 of this Article.
This paragraph shall apply mutatis mutandis as regards family benefits based on Articles 67, 68 and 69 of Regulation (EC) No 883/2004.
ARTICLE 33
Nationals of Iceland, Liechtenstein, Norway and Switzerland
1. The provisions of this Title applicable to Union citizens shall apply to nationals of Iceland, the Principality of Liechtenstein, the Kingdom of Norway, and the Swiss Confederation provided that:
(a) Iceland, the Principality of Liechtenstein, the Kingdom of Norway, and the Swiss Confederation, as applicable, have concluded and apply corresponding agreements with the United Kingdom which apply to Union citizens; and
(b) Iceland, the Principality of Liechtenstein, the Kingdom of Norway, and the Swiss Confederation, as applicable, have concluded and apply corresponding agreements with the Union which apply to United Kingdom nationals.
& /en 62 2. Upon notification from the United Kingdom and from the Union of the date of entry into force of the agreements referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article, the Joint Committee established by Article 164 ("Joint Committee") shall set the date from which the provisions of this Title shall apply to the nationals of Iceland, the Principality of Liechtenstein, the Kingdom of Norway, and the Swiss Confederation, as applicable.
ARTICLE 34
Administrative cooperation
1. By way of derogation from Articles 7 and 128(1), as of the date of entry into force of this Agreement, the United Kingdom shall have the status of observer in the Administrative Commission. It may, where the items on the agenda relating to this Title concern the United Kingdom, send a representative, to be present in an advisory capacity, to the meetings of the Administrative Commission and to the meetings of the bodies referred to in Articles 73 and 74 of Regulation (EC) No 883/2004 where such items are discussed.
2. By way of derogation from Article 8, the United Kingdom shall take part in the Electronic Exchange of Social Security Information (EESSI) and bear the related costs.
& /en 63 ARTICLE 35
Reimbursement, recovery and offsetting
The provisions of Regulations (EC) No 883/2004 and (EC) No 987/2009 on reimbursement, recovery and offsetting shall continue to apply in relation to events, in so far as they relate to persons not covered by Article 30, that:
(a) occurred before the end of the transition period; or
(b) occur after the end of the transition period and relate to persons who were covered by Articles 30 or 32 when the event occurred.
& /en 64 ARTICLE 36
Development of law and adaptations of Union acts
1. Where Regulations (EC) No 883/2004 and (EC) No 987/2009 are amended or replaced after the end of the transition period, references to those Regulations in this Agreement shall be understood as referring to those Regulations as amended or replaced, in accordance with the acts listed in Part II of Annex I to this Agreement.
The Joint Committee shall revise Part II of Annex I to this Agreement and align it to any act amending or replacing Regulations (EC) No 883/2004 and (EC) No 987/2009 as soon as such act is adopted by the Union. To that end, the Union shall, as soon as possible after adoption, inform the United Kingdom within the Joint Committee of any act amending or replacing those Regulations.
2. By way of derogation from the second subparagraph of paragraph 1, the Joint Committee shall assess the effects of an act amending or replacing Regulations (EC) No 883/2004 and (EC) No 987/2009 where that act:
(a) amends or replaces the matters covered by Article 3 of Regulation (EC) No 883/2004; or
& /en 65 (b) makes a cash benefit exportable where that cash benefit was non-exportable under Regulation (EC) No 883/2004 at the end of the transition period, or makes a cash benefit non-exportable, where that cash benefit was exportable at the end of the transition period; or
(c) makes a cash benefit exportable for an unlimited period of time, where that cash benefit was exportable only for a limited period of time under Regulation (EC) No 883/2004 at the end of the transition period, or makes a cash benefit exportable only for a limited period of time, where that cash benefit was exportable for an unlimited period of time under that Regulation at the end of the transition period.
In making its assessment, the Joint Committee shall consider in good faith the scale of the changes referred to in the first subparagraph of this paragraph, as well as the importance of the continued good functioning of Regulations (EC) No 883/2004 and (EC) No 987/2009 between the Union and the United Kingdom and the importance of there being a competent State in relation to individuals within the scope of Regulation (EC) No 883/2004.
If the Joint Committee so decides within 6 months from receiving the information given by the Union pursuant to paragraph 1, Part II of Annex I to this Agreement shall not be aligned to the act referred to in the first subparagraph of this paragraph.
& /en 66 For the purposes of this paragraph:
(a) "exportable" means payable under Regulation (EC) No 883/2004 to or in relation to a person residing in a Member State or in the United Kingdom if the institution responsible for providing the benefit is not situated there; "non-exportable" shall be interpreted accordingly; and
(b) "exportable for an unlimited period of time" means exportable for as long as the conditions giving rise to the entitlements are met.
3. Regulations (EC) No 883/2004 and (EC) No 987/2009 shall, for the purposes of this Agreement, be understood as comprising the adaptations listed in Part III of Annex I to this Agreement. As soon as possible after the adoption of any changes in domestic provisions of relevance to Part III of Annex I to this Agreement, the United Kingdom shall inform the Union thereof within the Joint Committee.
4. The Decisions and Recommendations of the Administrative Commission shall, for the purposes of this Agreement, be understood as comprising the decisions and recommendations listed in Part I of Annex I. The Joint Committee shall amend Part I of Annex I to reflect any new Decision or Recommendation adopted by the Administrative Commission. To that end, as soon as possible after adoption of decisions and recommendations of the Administrative Commission, the Union shall inform the United Kingdom thereof within the Joint Committee. Such amendments shall be made by the Joint Committee on a proposal of the Union or the United Kingdom.
& /en 67 TITLE IV
OTHER PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 37
Publicity
The Member States and the United Kingdom shall disseminate information concerning the rights and obligations of persons covered by this Part, in particular by means of awareness-raising campaigns conducted, as appropriate, through national and local media and other means of communication.
ARTICLE 38
More favourable provisions
1. This Part shall not affect any laws, regulations or administrative provisions applicable in a host State or a State of work which would be more favourable to the persons concerned. This paragraph shall not apply to Title III.
& /en 68 2. Article 12 and Article 23(1) shall be without prejudice to the Common Travel Area arrangements between the United Kingdom and Ireland as regards more favourable treatment which may result from these arrangements for the persons concerned.
ARTICLE 39
Life-long protection
The persons covered by this Part shall enjoy the rights provided for in the relevant Titles of this Part for their lifetime, unless they cease to meet the conditions set out in those Titles.
& /en 69 PART THREE
SEPARATION PROVISIONS
TITLE I
GOODS PLACED ON THE MARKET
ARTICLE 40
Definitions
For the purposes of this Title, the following definitions shall apply:
(a) "making available on the market" means any supply of a good for distribution, consumption or use on the market in the course of a commercial activity, whether in return for payment or free of charge;
(b) "placing on the market" means the first making available of a good on the market in the Union or the United Kingdom;
& /en 70 (c) "supply of a good for distribution, consumption or use" means that an existing and individually identifiable good, after the stage of manufacturing has taken place, is the subject matter of a written or verbal agreement between two or more legal or natural persons for the transfer of ownership, any other property right, or possession concerning the good in question, or is the subject matter of an offer to a legal or natural person or persons to conclude such an agreement;
(d) "putting into service" means the first use of a good within the Union or the United Kingdom by the end user for the purposes for which it was intended or, in the case of marine equipment, placing on board;
(e) "market surveillance" means the activities carried out and measures taken by market surveillance authorities to ensure that goods comply with the applicable requirements and do not endanger health, safety or any other aspect of public interest protection;
(f) "market surveillance authority" means an authority of a Member State or of the United Kingdom responsible for carrying out market surveillance on its territory;
& /en 71 (g) "conditions for the marketing of goods" means requirements concerning the characteristics of goods such as levels of quality, performance, safety or dimensions, including on the composition of such goods or on the terminology, symbols, testing and testing methods, packaging, marking, labelling, and conformity assessment procedures used in relation to such goods; the term also covers requirements concerning production methods and processes, where these have an effect on product characteristics;
(h) "conformity assessment body" means a body that performs conformity assessment activities including calibration, testing, certification and inspection;
(i) "notified body" means a conformity assessment body authorised to carry out third-party conformity assessment tasks under Union law harmonising the conditions for the marketing of goods;
(j) "animal products" means products of animal origin, animal by-products and derived products, as referred to in points (29), (30) and (31) of Article 4 of Regulation (EU) 2016/429 of the European Parliament and of the Council1, respectively, feed of animal origin, and food and feed containing products of animal origin.

Regulation (EU) 2016/429 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 9 March 2016 on transmissible animal diseases and amending and repealing certain acts in the area of animal health ("Animal Health Law") (OJ L 84, 31.3.2016, p. 1
& /en 72 ARTICLE 41
Continued circulation of goods placed on the market
1. Any good that was lawfully placed on the market in the Union or the United Kingdom before the end of the transition period may:
(a) be further made available on the market of the Union or of the United Kingdom and circulate between these two markets until it reaches its end-user;
(b) where provided in the applicable provisions of Union law, be put into service in the Union or in the United Kingdom.
2. The requirements set out in Articles 34 and 35 TFEU and the relevant Union law governing the marketing of goods, including the conditions for the marketing of goods, applicable to the goods concerned shall apply in respect of the goods referred to in paragraph 1.
3. Paragraph 1 shall apply to all existing and individually identifiable goods within the meaning of Title II of Part Three of the TFEU, with the exception of the circulation between the Union market and the United Kingdom's market or vice-versa of:
(a) live animals and germinal products;
(b) animal products.
& /en 73 4. In respect of a movement of live animals or of germinal products between a Member State and the United Kingdom, or vice-versa, the provisions of Union law listed in Annex II shall apply, provided that the date of departure was before the end of the transition period.
5. This Article shall be without prejudice to the possibility for the United Kingdom, a Member State or the Union to take measures to prohibit or restrict the making available on its market of a good referred to in paragraph 1, or a category of such goods, where and to the extent permitted by Union law.
6. The provisions of this Title shall be without prejudice to any applicable rules on modalities of sale, intellectual property, customs procedures, tariffs and taxes.
ARTICLE 42
Proof of placing on the market
Where an economic operator relies on Article 41(1) with respect to a specific good, that operator shall bear the burden of proof of demonstrating, on the basis of any relevant document, that the good was placed on the market in the Union or the United Kingdom before the end of the transition period.
& /en 74 ARTICLE 43
Market surveillance
1. The market surveillance authorities of the Member States and the market surveillance authorities of the United Kingdom shall exchange without delay any relevant information collected with regard to the goods referred to in Article 41(1) in the context of their respective market surveillance activities. They shall, in particular, communicate to each other and to the European Commission any information relating to those goods presenting a serious risk, as well as any measures taken in relation to non-compliant goods, including relevant information drawn from networks, information systems and databases established under Union or United Kingdom law in relation to those goods.
2. The Member States and the United Kingdom shall transmit without delay any request from the market surveillance authorities of the United Kingdom or of a Member State, respectively, to a conformity assessment body established in their territory, where that request concerns a conformity assessment carried out by that body in its capacity as notified body before the end of the transition period. Member States and the United Kingdom shall ensure that any such request is promptly addressed by the conformity assessment body.
& /en 75 ARTICLE 44
Transfer of files and documents relating to ongoing procedures
The United Kingdom shall transfer without delay to the competent authority of a Member State designated in accordance with the procedures provided for in the applicable Union law all relevant files or documents in relation to assessments, approvals and authorisations ongoing on the day before the date of entry into force of this Agreement and led by a United Kingdom competent authority in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 528/20121, Regulation (EC) No 1107/20092, Directive 2001/83/EC
and Directive 2001/82/EC
of the European Parliament and of the Council.

Regulation (EU) No 528/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 May 2012 concerning the making available on the market and use of biocidal products (OJ
167, 27.6.2012, p. 1).
Regulation (EC) No 1107/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 21 October 2009 concerning the placing of plant protection products on the market (OJ
309, 24.11.2009, p. 1).
Directive 2001/83/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 6 November 2001 on the Community code relating to medicinal products for human use (OJ L 311, 28.11.2001, p. 67).
Directive 2001/82/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 6 November 2001 on the Community code relating to veterinary medicinal products (OJ L 311, 28.11.2001, p. 1).
& /en 76 ARTICLE 45
Making available of information in relation to past authorisation procedures  for medicinal products
1. The United Kingdom shall, upon a reasoned request from a Member State or the European Medicines Agency, make available without delay the marketing authorisation dossier of a medicinal product authorised by a competent authority of the United Kingdom before the end of the transition period, where that dossier is necessary for the assessment of a marketing authorisation application in accordance with Articles 10 and 10a of Directive 2001/83/EC or Articles 13 and 13a of Directive 2001/82/EC.
2. A Member State shall, upon a reasoned request from the United Kingdom, make available without delay the marketing authorisation dossier of a medicinal product authorised by a competent authority of that Member State before the end of the transition period, where that dossier is necessary for the assessment of a marketing authorisation application in the United Kingdom in accordance with the United Kingdom's legislative requirements, to the extent that those legislative requirements replicate the circumstances of Articles 10 and 10a of Directive 2001/83/EC or Articles 13 and 13a of Directive 2001/82/EC.
& /en 77 ARTICLE 46
Making available of information held by notified bodies  established in the United Kingdom or in a Member State
1. The United Kingdom shall ensure that information held by a conformity assessment body established in the United Kingdom in relation to its activities as a notified body under Union law before the end of the transition period is made available at the request of the certificate holder, without delay, to a notified body established in a Member State as indicated by the certificate holder.
2. Member States shall ensure that information held by a notified body established in the Member State concerned in relation to its activities before the end of the transition period is made available at the request of the certificate holder, without delay, to a conformity assessment body established in the United Kingdom as indicated by the certificate holder.
& /en 78 TITLE II
ONGOING CUSTOMS PROCEDURES
ARTICLE 47
Union status of goods
1. Regulation (EU) No 952/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council
shall apply in respect of Union goods referred to in point (23) of Article 5 of that Regulation, where such goods move from the customs territory of the United Kingdom to the customs territory of the Union, or vice versa, provided that the movement started before the end of the transition period and ended thereafter. A movement of goods which has started before the end of the transition period and ends thereafter shall be treated as an intra-Union movement regarding importation and exportation licencing requirements in Union law.

Regulation (EU) No 952/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of
October 2013 laying down the Union Customs Code (OJ L 269, 10.10.2013, p. 1).
& /en 79 2. For the purposes of paragraph 1, the presumption of the customs status of Union goods as referred to in Article 153(1) of Regulation (EU) No 952/2013 shall not apply. The customs status of those goods as Union goods, as well as the fact that the movement referred to in paragraph 1 started before the end of the transition period, shall need to be proven for every movement by the person concerned by any of the means referred to in Article 199 of Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2015/24471. The proof of the start of the movement shall be provided by means of a transport document relating to the goods.
3. Paragraph 2 shall not apply in respect of Union goods that are carried by air and have been loaded or transhipped at an airport in the customs territory of the United Kingdom for consignment to the customs territory of the Union or have been loaded or transhipped at an airport in the customs territory of the Union for consignment to the customs territory of the United Kingdom, where such goods are carried under cover of a single transport document issued in either of the customs territories concerned, provided that the movement by air started before the end of the transition period and the movement ended thereafter.

Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2015/2447 of 24 November 2015 laying down detailed rules for implementing certain provisions of Regulation (EU) No 952/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council laying down the Union Customs Code (OJ L 343, 29.12.2015, p. 558).
& /en 80 4. Paragraph 2 shall not apply in respect of Union goods that are carried by sea and have been shipped between ports in the customs territory of the United Kingdom and ports in the customs territory of the Union by a regular shipping service, as referred to in Article 120 of Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2015/24461, provided that:
(a) the voyage comprising the ports in the customs territory of the United Kingdom and ports in the customs territory of the Union started before the end of the transition period and ended thereafter; and
(b) the regular shipping service vessel called at one or several ports in the customs territory of the United Kingdom or in the customs territory of the Union before the end of the transition period.
5. When during the voyage referred to in point (a) of paragraph 4 the regular shipping service vessel calls at one or several ports in the customs territory of the United Kingdom after the end of the transition period:
(a) for goods loaded before the end of the transition period and unloaded in those ports, the customs status of Union goods shall not be altered;

Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2015/2446 of 28 July 2015 supplementing Regulation (EU) No 952/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council as regards detailed rules concerning certain provisions of the Union Customs Code (OJ L 343, 29.12.2015, p. 1).
& /en 81 (b) for goods loaded in ports called after the end of the transition period, the customs status of Union goods shall not be altered provided that it is proven in accordance with paragraph 2.
ARTICLE 48
Entry summary declaration and pre-departure declaration
1. Regulation (EU) No 952/2013 shall apply in respect of entry summary declarations that were lodged at a customs office of first entry in accordance with Chapter I of Title IV of that Regulation before the end of the transition period, and those declarations shall produce the same legal effects in the customs territory of the Union and the customs territory of the United Kingdom after the end of the transition period.
2. Regulation (EU) No 952/2013 shall apply in respect of pre-departure declarations that were lodged in accordance with Chapter I of Title VIII of that Regulation before the end of the transition period and, where applicable, where the goods were released in accordance with Article 194 of that Regulation before the end of the transition period. Those declarations shall produce the same legal effects in the customs territory of the Union and the customs territory of the United Kingdom after the end of the transition period.
& /en 82 ARTICLE 49
Ending of temporary storage or customs procedures
1. Regulation (EU) No 952/2013 shall apply in respect of non-Union goods that were in temporary storage referred to in point (17) of Article 5 of that Regulation at the end of the transition period and in respect of goods that were under any of the customs procedures referred to in point (16) of Article 5 of that Regulation in the customs territory of the United Kingdom at the end of the transition period
until such temporary storage is ended, until one of the special customs procedures is discharged, until the goods are released for free circulation, or until the goods are taken out of the territory, provided that such event occurs after the end of the transition period but not later than within the corresponding time limit referred to in Annex III.
However, points (b) and (c) of Article 148(5) and Article 219 of Regulation (EU) No 952/2013 shall not apply in respect of movements of goods between the customs territory of the United Kingdom and the customs territory of the Union which end after the end of the transition period.
& /en 83 2. Regulation (EU) No 952/2013, Council Decision 2014/335/EU, Euratom1, Council Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 608/2014
and Council Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 609/2014
shall apply in respect of any customs debt arising after the end of the transition period from the end of temporary storage or discharge referred to in paragraph 1.
3. Section 1 of Chapter 1 of Title II of Implementing Regulation (EU) 2015/2447 shall apply in respect of requests to benefit from tariff quotas which have been accepted by the customs authorities in the customs territory of the United Kingdom and where the required supporting documents have been provided in accordance with Article 50 of that Regulation by the customs authorities in the customs territory of the United Kingdom before the end of the transition period, and shall apply in respect of the cancellation of requests and returns of unused allocated quantities of such requests.

Council Decision 2014/335/EU, Euratom of 26 May 2014 on the system of own resources of the European Union (OJ L 168, 7.6.2014, p. 105).
Council Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 608/2014 of 26 May 2014 laying down implementing measures for the system of own resources of the European Union (OJ L 168, 7.6.2014, p. 29).
Council Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 609/2014 of 26 May 2014 on the methods and procedure for making available the traditional, VAT and GNI-based own resources and on the measures to meet cash requirements (OJ L 168, 7.6.2014, p. 39).
& /en 84 ARTICLE 50
Access to relevant networks, information systems and databases
By way of derogation from Article 8, the United Kingdom shall have access, to the extent strictly necessary to comply with its obligations under this Title, to the networks, information systems and databases listed in Annex IV. The United Kingdom shall reimburse the Union for the actual costs incurred by the Union as a consequence of facilitating that access. The Union shall communicate to the United Kingdom the amount of those costs by 31 March of each year until the end of the period referred to in Annex IV. In the event that the communicated amount of the actual costs incurred considerably diverge
from the best estimates amount that was communicated by the Union to the United Kingdom before the signature of this Agreement, the United Kingdom shall pay without delay to the Union the best estimates amount and the Joint Committee shall determine the manner in which the difference between the actual costs incurred and the best estimates amount is to be addressed.
& /en 85 TITLE III
ONGOING VALUE ADDED TAX AND EXCISE DUTY MATTERS
ARTICLE 51
Value added tax (VAT)
1. Council Directive 2006/112/EC
shall apply in respect of goods dispatched or transported from the territory of the United Kingdom to the territory of a Member State, and vice versa, provided that the dispatch or transport started before the end of the transition period and ended thereafter.
2. Directive 2006/112/EC shall continue to apply until 5 years after the end of the transition period with regard to the taxable person's rights and obligations in relation to transactions with a cross-border element between the United Kingdom and a Member State that took place before the end of the transition period and with regard to transactions covered by paragraph 1.

Council Directive 2006/112/EC of 28 November 2006 on the common system of value added tax (OJ L 347, 11.12.2006, p. 1).
& /en 86 3. By way of derogation from paragraph 2 and from Article 15 of Council Directive 2008/9/EC1, refund applications that relate to VAT which was paid in a Member State by a taxable person established in the United Kingdom, or which was paid in the United Kingdom by a taxable person established in a Member State, shall be submitted under the conditions of that Directive at the latest on 31 March 2021.
4. By way of derogation from paragraph 2 and from Article 61(2) of Council Implementing Regulation (EU) No 282/20112, amendments to VAT returns that were submitted in accordance with Article 364 or Article 369f of Directive 2006/112/EC either in the United Kingdom with regard to services supplied in Member States of consumption before the end of the transition period, or in a Member State with regard to services supplied in the United Kingdom before the end of the transition period, shall be submitted at the latest on 31 December 2021.

Council Directive 2008/9/EC of 12 February 2008 laying down detailed rules for the refund of value added tax, provided for in Directive 2006/112/EC, to taxable persons not established in the Member State of refund but established in another Member State (OJ
44, 20.2.2008, p. 23).
Council Implementing Regulation (EU) No 282/2011 of 15 March 2011 laying down implementing measures for Directive 2006/112/EC on the common system of value added tax (OJ L 77, 23.3.2011, p.1).
& /en 87 ARTICLE 52
Excise goods
Council Directive 2008/118/EC
shall apply in respect of movements of excise goods under a duty suspension arrangement and in respect of movements of excise goods after release for consumption from the territory of the United Kingdom to the territory of a Member State, or vice versa, provided that the movement started before the end of the transition period and ended thereafter.
ARTICLE 53
Access to relevant networks, information systems and databases
By way of derogation from Article 8, the United Kingdom shall have access, to the extent strictly necessary to comply with its obligations under this Title, to the networks, information systems and databases listed in Annex IV. The United Kingdom shall reimburse the Union for the actual costs incurred by the Union as a consequence of facilitating that access. The Union shall communicate to the United Kingdom the amount of those costs by 31 March of each year until the end of the period referred to in Annex IV. In the event that the communicated amount of the actual costs incurred considerably diverge
from the best estimates amount that was communicated by the Union to the United Kingdom before the signature of this Agreement, the United Kingdom shall pay without delay to the Union the best estimates amount and the Joint Committee shall determine the manner in which the difference between the actual costs incurred and the best estimates amount is to be addressed.

Council Directive 2008/118/EC of 16 December 2008 concerning the general arrangements for excise duty and repealing Directive 92/12/EEC (OJ L 9, 14.1.2009, p. 12).
& /en 88 TITLE IV
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY
ARTICLE 54
Continued protection in the United Kingdom of registered or granted rights
1. The holder of any of the following intellectual property rights which have been registered or granted before the end of the transition period shall, without any re-examination, become the holder of a comparable registered and enforceable intellectual property right in the United Kingdom under the law of the United Kingdom:
(a) the holder of a European Union trade mark registered in accordance with Regulation (EU) 2017/1001 of the European Parliament and of the Council
shall become the holder of a trade mark in the United Kingdom, consisting of the same sign, for the same goods or services;

Regulation (EU) 2017/1001 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 14 June 2017 on the European Union trade mark (OJ L 154, 16.6.2017, p. 1).
& /en 89 (b) the holder of a Community design registered and, where applicable, published following a deferral of publication in accordance with Council Regulation (EC) No 6/2002
shall become the holder of a registered design right in the United Kingdom for the same design;
(c) the holder of a Community plant variety right granted pursuant to Council Regulation (EC) No 2100/94
shall become the holder of a plant variety right in the United Kingdom for the same plant variety.

Council Regulation (EC) No 6/2002 of 12 December 2001 on Community designs (OJ L 3, 5.1.2002, p. 1).
Council Regulation (EC) No 2100/94 of 27 July 1994 on Community plant variety rights (OJ L 227, 1.9.1994, p. 1).
& /en 90 2. Where a geographical indication, designation of origin or traditional speciality guaranteed within the meaning of Regulation (EU) No 1151/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council1, a geographical indication, designation of origin or traditional term for wine within the meaning of Regulation (EU) No 1308/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council2, a geographical indication within the meaning of Regulation (EC) No 110/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council
or a geographical indication within the meaning of Regulation (EU) No 251/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council4, is protected in the Union on the last day of the transition period by virtue of those Regulations, those persons who are entitled to use the geographical indication, the designation of origin, the traditional speciality guaranteed or the traditional term for wine concerned shall be entitled, as from the end of the transition period, without any re-examination, to use the geographical indication, the designation of origin, the traditional speciality guaranteed or the traditional term for wine concerned in the United Kingdom, which shall be granted at least the same level of protection under the law of the United Kingdom as under the following provisions of Union law:

Regulation (EU) No 1151/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 21 November 2012 on quality schemes for agricultural products and foodstuffs (OJ L 343, 14.12.2012, p. 1).
Regulation (EU) No 1308/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 17 December 2013 establishing a common organisation of the markets in agricultural products and repealing Council Regulations (EEC) No 922/72, (EEC) No 234/79, (EC) No 1037/2001 and (EC) No 1234/2007 (OJ L 347, 20.12.2013, p. 671).
Regulation (EC) No 110/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 January 2008 on the definition, description, presentation, labelling and the protection of geographical indications of spirit drinks and repealing Council Regulation (EEC) No 1576/89 (OJ L 39, 13.2.2008, p. 16).
Regulation (EU) No 251/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 February 2014 on the definition, description, presentation, labelling and the protection of geographical indications of aromatised wine products and repealing Council Regulation (EEC) No 1601/91 (OJ L 84, 20.3.2014, p. 14).
& /en 91 (a) Points (i), (j) and (k) of Article 4(1) of Directive (EU) 2015/2436 of the European Parliament and of the Council1; and
(b) in view of the geographical indication, designation of origin, traditional speciality guaranteed or traditional term for wine concerned, Article 13, Article 14(1), Article 24, Article 36(3), Articles 38 and 44 and point (b) of Article 45(1) of Regulation (EU) No 1151/2012; Article 90(1) of Regulation (EU) No 1306/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council2; Article 100(3), Article 102(1), Articles 103 and 113, and point (c)(x) of Article 157(1) of Regulation (EU) No 1308/2013; Article 62(3) and (4) of Commission Regulation (EC) No 607/20093; the first subparagraph of Article 15(3), Article 16 and Article 23(1) of Regulation (EC) No 110/2008 and, in so far as to the extent related to compliance with those provisions of that Regulation, Article 24(1) of that Regulation; or Article 19(1) and Article 20 of Regulation (EU) No 251/2014.

Directive (EU) 2015/2436 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 December 2015 to approximate the laws of the Member States relating to trade marks (OJ L 336, 23.12.2015, p. 1).
Regulation (EU) No 1306/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 17 December 2013 on the financing, management and monitoring of the common agricultural policy (OJ L 347, 20.12.2013, p. 549).
Commission Regulation (EC) No 607/2009 of 14 July 2009 laying down certain detailed rules for the implementation of Council Regulation (EC) No 479/2008 as regards protected designations of origin and geographical indications, traditional terms, labelling and presentation of certain wine sector products (OJ L 193 24.7.2009, p. 60).
& /en 92 Where a geographical indication, designation of origin, traditional speciality guaranteed or traditional term for wine referred to in the first subparagraph ceases to be protected in the Union after the end of the transition period, the first subparagraph shall cease to apply in respect of that geographical indication, designation of origin, traditional speciality guaranteed or traditional term for wine.
The first subparagraph shall not apply where protection in the Union is derived from international agreements to which the Union is a party.
This paragraph shall apply unless and until an agreement as referred to in Article 184 that supersedes this paragraph enters into force or becomes applicable.
3. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, if an intellectual property right referred to in that paragraph is declared invalid or revoked, or, in the case of a Community plant variety right, is declared null and void or is cancelled, in the Union as the result of an administrative or judicial procedure which was ongoing on the last day of the transition period, the corresponding right in the United Kingdom shall also be declared invalid or revoked, or declared null and void, or be cancelled. The date of effect of the declaration or revocation or cancellation in the United Kingdom shall be the same as in the Union.
& /en 93 By way of derogation from the first subparagraph, the United Kingdom shall not be obliged to declare invalid or to revoke the corresponding right in the United Kingdom where the grounds for the invalidity or revocation of the European Union trade mark or registered Community design do not apply in the United Kingdom.
4. A trade mark or registered design right which arises in the United Kingdom in accordance with point (a) or (b) of paragraph 1 shall have as its first renewal date the renewal date of the corresponding intellectual property right registered in accordance with Union law.
5. In respect of trade marks in the United Kingdom referred to in point (a) of paragraph 1 of this Article, the following shall apply:
(a) the trade mark shall enjoy the date of filing or the date of priority of the European Union trade mark and, where appropriate, the seniority of a trade mark of the United Kingdom claimed under Article 39 or 40 of Regulation (EU) 2017/1001;
(b) the trade mark shall not be liable to revocation on the ground that the corresponding European Union trade mark had not been put into genuine use in the territory of the United Kingdom before the end of the transition period;
& /en 94 (c) the owner of a European Union trade mark that has acquired a reputation in the Union shall be entitled to exercise in the United Kingdom rights equivalent to those provided for in point (c) of Article 9(2) of Regulation (EU) 2017/1001 and point (a) of Article 5(3) of Directive 2015/2436 in respect of the corresponding trade mark on the basis of the reputation acquired in the Union by the end of the transition period and thereafter the continuing reputation of that trade mark shall be based on the use of the mark in the United Kingdom.
6. In respect of registered design rights and plant variety rights in the United Kingdom referred to in points (b) and (c) of paragraph 1, the following shall apply:
(a) the term of protection under the law of the United Kingdom shall be at least equal to the remaining period of protection under Union law of the corresponding registered Community design or Community plant variety right;
(b) the date of filing or date of priority shall be that of the corresponding registered Community design or Community plant variety right.
& /en 95 ARTICLE 55
Registration procedure
1. The registration, grant or protection pursuant to Article 54(1) and (2) of this Agreement shall be carried out free of charge by the relevant entities in the United Kingdom, using the data available in the registries of the European Union Intellectual Property Office, the Community Plant Variety Office and the European Commission. Annex III to Regulation (EC) No 110/2008 shall be considered a registry for the purpose of this Article.
2. For the purposes of paragraph 1, holders of the intellectual property rights referred to in Article 54(1) and those persons who are entitled to use a geographical indication, designation of origin, traditional speciality guaranteed or traditional term for wine referred to in Article 54(2) shall not be required to introduce an application or to undertake any particular administrative procedure. Holders of intellectual property rights referred to in Article 54(1) shall not be required to have a correspondence address in the United Kingdom in the 3 years following the end of the transition period.
3. The European Union Intellectual Property Office, the Community Plant Variety Office and the European Commission shall provide to the relevant entities in the United Kingdom the information necessary for the registration, grant or protection in the United Kingdom pursuant to Article 54(1) or (2).
& /en 96 4. This Article shall be without prejudice to renewal fees that may apply at the time of renewal of the rights, or the possibility for the holders concerned to surrender their intellectual property rights in the United Kingdom in accordance with the relevant procedure under the law of the United Kingdom.
ARTICLE 56
Continued protection in the United Kingdom  of international registrations designating the Union
The United Kingdom shall take measures to ensure that natural or legal persons who have obtained protection before the end of the transition period for internationally registered trade marks or designs designating the Union pursuant to the Madrid system for the international registration of marks, or pursuant to the Hague system for the international deposit of industrial designs, enjoy protection in the United Kingdom for their trade marks or industrial designs in respect of those international registrations.
& /en 97 ARTICLE 57
Continued protection in the United Kingdom of unregistered Community designs
The holder of a right in relation to an unregistered Community design which arose before the end of the transition period in accordance with Regulation (EC) No 6/2002 shall in relation to that unregistered Community design ipso iure become the holder of an enforceable intellectual property right in the United Kingdom, under the law of the United Kingdom, that affords the same level of protection as that provided for in Regulation (EC) No 6/2002. The term of protection of that right under the law of the United Kingdom shall be at least equal to the remaining period of protection of the corresponding unregistered Community design under Article 11(1) of that Regulation.
& /en 98 ARTICLE 58
Continued protection of databases
1. The holder of a right in relation to a database in respect of the United Kingdom in accordance with Article 7 of Directive 96/9/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council
which arose before the end of the transition period shall, in relation to that database, maintain an enforceable intellectual property right in the United Kingdom, under the law of the United Kingdom, that affords the same level of protection as that provided for in Directive 96/9/EC, provided that the holder of that right continues to comply with the requirements of Article 11 of that Directive. The term of protection of that right under the law of the United Kingdom shall be at least equal to the remaining period of protection under Article 10 of Directive 96/9/EC.
2. The following persons and undertakings shall be deemed to comply with the requirements of Article 11 of Directive 96/9/EC:
(a) United Kingdom nationals;
(b) natural persons with a habitual residence in the United Kingdom;

Directive 96/9/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 March 1996 on the legal protection of databases (OJ L 77, 27.3.1996, p. 20).
& /en 99 (c) undertakings established in the United Kingdom, provided that where such an undertaking has only its registered office in the United Kingdom, its operations are genuinely linked on an ongoing basis with the economy of the United Kingdom or of a Member State.
ARTICLE 59
Right of priority with respect to pending applications  for European Union trade marks and Community plant variety rights
1. Where a person has filed an application for a European Union trade mark or a Community design in accordance with Union law before the end of the transition period and where that application was accorded a date of filing, that person shall have, for the same trade mark in respect of goods or services which are identical with or contained within those for which the application has been filed in the Union or for the same design, the right to file an application in the United Kingdom within 9 months from the end of the transition period. An application made pursuant to this Article shall be deemed to have the same filing date and date of priority as the corresponding application filed in the Union and, where appropriate, the seniority of a trade mark of the United Kingdom claimed under Article 39 or 40 of Regulation (EU) 2017/1001.
& /en 100 2. Where a person has filed an application for a Community plant variety right in accordance with Union law before the end of the transition period, that person shall have, for the purpose of filing an application for the same plant variety right in the United Kingdom, an ad hoc right of priority in the United Kingdom during a period of 6 months from the end of the transition period. The right of priority shall cause the date of priority of the application for the Community plant variety right to be deemed to be the date of application for a plant variety right in the United Kingdom for the purpose of determining distinctness, novelty and entitlement to the right.
& /en 101 ARTICLE 60
Pending applications for supplementary protection certificates  in the United Kingdom
1. Regulations (EC) No 1610/96
and No 469/2009
of the European Parliament and of the Council, respectively, shall apply in respect of applications for supplementary protection certificates for plant protection products and for medicinal products, as well as to applications for the extension of the duration of such certificates, where such applications were submitted to an authority in the United Kingdom before the end of the transition period in cases where the administrative procedure for the grant of the certificate concerned or of the extension of its duration was ongoing at the end of the transition period.
2. Any certificate granted pursuant to paragraph 1 shall provide for the same level of protection as that provided for in Regulation (EC) No 1610/96 or Regulation (EC) No 469/2009.

Regulation (EC) No 1610/96 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 July 1996 concerning the creation of a supplementary protection certificate for plant protection products (OJ L 198, 8.8.1996, p. 30).
Regulation (EC) No 469/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 6 May 2009 concerning the supplementary protection certificate for medicinal products (OJ L 152, 16.6.2009, p. 1).
& /en 102 ARTICLE 61
Exhaustion of rights
Intellectual property rights which were exhausted both in the Union and in the United Kingdom before the end of the transition period under the conditions provided for by Union law shall remain exhausted both in the Union and in the United Kingdom.
& /en 103 TITLE V
ONGOING POLICE AND JUDICIAL COOPERATION IN CRIMINAL MATTERS
ARTICLE 62
Ongoing judicial cooperation proceedings in criminal matters
1. In the United Kingdom, as well as in the Member States in situations involving the United Kingdom, the following acts shall apply as follows:
(a) the Convention, established by the Council in accordance with Article 34 of the Treaty on European Union on Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters between the Member States of the European Union1, and the Protocol established by the Council in accordance with Article 34 of the Treaty on European Union to the Convention on Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters between the Member States of the European Union2, shall apply in respect of mutual legal assistance requests received under the respective instrument before the end of the transition period by the central authority or judicial authority;

OJ C 197, 12.7.2000, p. 3.
OJ C 326, 21.11.2001, p. 2.
& /en 104 (b) Council Framework Decision 2002/584/JHA
shall apply in respect of European arrest warrants where the requested person was arrested before the end of the transition period for the purposes of the execution of a European arrest warrant, irrespective of the decision of the executing judicial authority as to whether the requested person is to remain in detention or be provisionally released;
(c) Council Framework Decision 2003/577/JHA
shall apply in respect of freezing orders received before the end of the transition period by the central authority or the competent judicial authority for execution, or by a judicial authority in the executing State with no jurisdiction to recognise or execute a freezing order, but which transmits the freezing order ex officio to the competent judicial authority for execution;
(d) Council Framework Decision 2005/214/JHA
shall apply in respect of decisions received before the end of the transition period by the central authority or the competent authority in the executing State, or by an authority of the executing State with no jurisdiction to recognise or execute a decision, but which transmits the decision ex officio to the competent authority for execution;

Council Framework Decision 2002/584/JHA of 13 June 2002 on the European arrest warrant and the surrender procedures between Member States (OJ L 190, 18.7.2002, p. 1).
Council Framework Decision 2003/577/JHA of 22 July 2003 on the execution in the European Union of orders freezing property or evidence (OJ L 196, 2.8.2003, p. 45).
Council Framework Decision 2005/214/JHA of 24 February 2005 on the application of the principle of mutual recognition to financial penalties (OJ L 76, 22.3.2005, p. 16).
& /en 105 (e) Council Framework Decision 2006/783/JHA
shall apply in respect of confiscation orders received before the end of the transition period by the central authority or the competent authority of the executing State, or by an authority in the executing State with no jurisdiction to recognise or execute a confiscation order, but which transmits the confiscation order ex officio to the competent authority for execution;
(f) Council Framework Decision 2008/909/JHA
shall apply:
(i) in respect of judgments received before the end of the transition period by the competent authority of the executing State, or by an authority of the executing State with no competence to recognise and enforce a judgment, but which transmits the judgment ex officio to the competent authority for execution;
(ii) for the purposes of Article 4(6) or Article 5(3) of Framework Decision 2002/584/JHA, where that Framework Decision is applicable by virtue of point (b) of this paragraph.

Council Framework Decision 2006/783/JHA of 7 October 2006 on the application of the principle of mutual recognition to confiscation orders (OJ L 328, 24.11.2006, p. 54).
Council Framework Decision 2008/909/JHA of 27 November 2008 on the application of the principle of mutual recognition to judgments in criminal matters imposing custodial sentences or measures involving deprivation of liberty for the purpose of their enforcement in the European Union (OJ L 327, 5.12.2008, p. 27).
& /en 106 (g) Council Framework Decision 2008/675/JHA
shall apply in respect of new criminal proceedings within the meaning of Article 3 of that Framework Decision that are initiated before the end of the transition period;
(h) Council Framework Decision 2009/315/JHA
shall apply in respect of requests for information on conviction received before the end of the transition period by the central authority; however, after the end of the transition period, replies to such requests shall not be transmitted through the European Criminal Records Information System established pursuant to the Council Decision 2009/316/JHA
(i) Council Framework Decision 2009/829/JHA
shall apply in respect of decisions on supervision measures received before the end of the transition period by the central authority or the competent authority in the executing State, or by an authority of the executing State with no competence to recognise a decision, but which forwards it ex officio to the competent authority for execution;

Council Framework Decision 2008/675/JHA of 24 July 2008 on taking account of convictions in the Member States of the European Union in the course of new criminal proceedings (OJ
220, 15.8.2008, p. 32).
Council Framework Decision 2009/315/JHA of 26 February 2009 on the organisation and content of the exchange of information extracted from the criminal record between Member States (OJ L 93, 7.4.2009, p. 23).
Council Decision 2009/316/JHA of 6 April 2009 on the establishment of the European Criminal Records Information System (ECRIS) in application of Article 11 of Framework Decision 2009/315/JHA (OJ L 93, 7.4.2009, p. 33).
Council Framework Decision 2009/829/JHA of 23 October 2009 on the application, between Member States of the European Union, of the principle of mutual recognition to decisions on supervision measures as an alternative to provisional detention (OJ L 294, 11.11.2009, p. 20).
& /en 107 (j) Article 10(3) of Directive 2011/93/EU of the European Parliament and the Council
shall apply in respect of requests for information received before the end of the transition period by the central authority; however, after the end of the transition period, replies to such requests shall not be transmitted through the European Criminal Records Information System established pursuant to Decision 2009/316/JHA;
(k) Directive 2011/99/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council
shall apply in respect of European protection orders received before the end of the transition period by the central authority or the competent authority of the executing State, or by an authority of the executing State with no competence to recognise a European protection order, but which forwards it ex officio to the competent authority for execution;
(l) Directive 2014/41/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council
shall apply in respect of European Investigation Orders received before the end of the transition period by the central authority or the executing authority, or by an authority in the executing State with no competence to recognise or execute a European Investigation Order which forwards it ex officio to the executing authority for execution.

Directive 2011/93/EU of the European Parliament and the Council of 13 December 2011 on combatting the sexual abuse and sexual exploitation of children and child pornography, and replacing Council Framework Decision 2004/68/JHA (OJ L 335, 17.12.2011, p. 1).
Directive 2011/99/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 December 2011 on the European protection order (OJ L 338, 21.12.2011, p. 2).
Directive 2014/41/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 3 April 2014 regarding the European Investigation Order in criminal matters (OJ L 130, 1.5.2014, p. 1).
& /en 108 2. The competent authorities of the United Kingdom may continue to participate in the joint investigation teams in which they were participating before the end of the transition period, where those investigation teams were set up either in accordance with Article 13 of the Convention established by the Council in accordance with Article 34 of the Treaty on European Union, on Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters between the Member States of the European Union or in accordance with Council Framework Decision 2002/465/JHA
By way of derogation from Article 8 of this Agreement, the United Kingdom shall be entitled to use, for no longer than one year after the end of the transition period, the Secure Information Exchange Network Application (SIENA) to the extent strictly necessary for the purpose of exchanging information within the joint investigation teams referred to in the first subparagraph of this paragraph. The United Kingdom shall reimburse the Union for the actual costs incurred by the Union as a consequence of facilitating the United Kingdom's use of SIENA. The Union shall communicate the amount of those costs to the United Kingdom by 31 March 2021. In the event that the communicated amount of the actual costs incurred considerably diverge
from the best estimates amount that was communicated by the Union to the United Kingdom before the signature of this Agreement, the United Kingdom shall pay without delay to the Union the best estimates amount and the Joint Committee shall determine the manner in which the difference between the actual costs incurred and the best estimates amount is to be addressed.

Council Framework Decision 2002/465/JHA of 13 June 2002 on joint investigation teams (OJ L 162, 20.6.2002, p. 1).
& /en 109 3. Eurojust may, upon a request by the United Kingdom, subject to compliance with point (a) of Article 26a(7) and Article 27 of Council Decision 2002/187/JHA1, provide information, including personal data, from its Case Management system, if necessary to complete the ongoing procedures referred to in points (a), (b) (c), (e) and (l) of paragraph 1 of this Article or the activities of the joint investigation teams referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article. The United Kingdom's competent authorities may, upon request, provide Eurojust with information in their possession if necessary to complete the ongoing procedures referred to in points (a), (b), (c), (e) and (l) of paragraph 1 of this Article or the activities of the joint investigation teams referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article. Where expenses of any extraordinary nature arise out of the application of this paragraph, the Joint Committee shall determine the manner in which such expenses are to be addressed.

Council Decision 2002/187/JHA of 28 February 2002 setting up Eurojust with a view to reinforcing the fight against serious crime (OJ L 63, 6.3.2002, p. 1).
& /en 110 ARTICLE 63
Ongoing law enforcement cooperation proceedings,  police cooperation and exchange of information
1. In the United Kingdom, as well as in the Member States in situations involving the United Kingdom, the following acts shall apply as follows:
(a) Articles 39 and 40 of the Convention implementing the Schengen Agreement of 14 June 1985 ("Schengen Implementing Convention")1, in conjunction with Articles 42 and 43 thereof, shall apply in respect of:
(i) requests in accordance with Article 39 of the Schengen Implementing Convention that are received before the end of the transition period by the central body responsible in the Contracting Party for international police cooperation or by competent authorities of the requested Party, or by requested police authorities which do not have the power to deal with the request, but which forward the request to the competent authorities;

Convention implementing the Schengen Agreement of 14 June 1985 between the Governments of the States of the Benelux Economic Union, the Federal Republic of Germany and the French Republic on the gradual abolition of checks at their common borders (OJ
239, 22.9.2000, p. 19).
& /en 111 (ii) requests for assistance in accordance with Article 40(1) of the Schengen Implementing Convention that are received before the end of the transition period by an authority designated by a Contracting Party;
(iii) cross-border surveillance that is carried out without prior authorisation in accordance with Article 40(2) of the Schengen Implementing Convention, where that surveillance started before the end of the transition period;
(b) the Convention drawn up on the basis of Article K.3 of the Treaty on European Union, on mutual assistance and cooperation between customs administrations
shall apply in respect of:
(i) requests for information that are received before the end of the transition period by the requested authority;
(ii) requests for surveillance that are received before the end of the transition period by the requested authority
(iii) requests for enquiries that are received before the end of the transition period by the requested authority;
(iv) requests for notification that are received before the end of the transition period by the requested authority;

OJ C 24, 23.1.1998, p. 2.
& /en 112 (v) requests for authorisation of cross-border surveillance or for entrusting observation to the officers of the Member State in whose territory observation is carried out that are received before the end of the transition period by an authority designated by the requested Member State that is empowered to grant the requested authorisation or to pass on the request;
(vi) cross-border surveillance that is carried out without prior authorisation in accordance with Article 40(2) of the Schengen Implementing Convention, where that surveillance started before the end of the transition period;
(vii) requests to carry out controlled delivery that are received before the end of the transition period by the requested authority;
(viii) requests to authorise covert investigations that are received before the end of the transition period by the requested authority;
(ix) joint special investigation teams that are set up pursuant to Article 24 of that Convention before the end of the transition period;
(c) Council Decision 2000/642/JHA
shall apply in respect of requests that are received before the end of the transition period by the requested Financial Intelligence Unit;

Council Decision 2000/642/JHA of 17 October 2000 concerning arrangements for cooperation between financial intelligence units of the Member States in respect of exchanging information (OJ L 271, 24.10.2000, p. 4).
& /en 113 (d) Council Framework Decision 2006/960/JHA
shall apply in respect of requests that are received before the end of the transition period by the requested competent law enforcement authority;
(e) Council Decision 2007/533/JHA
shall apply in respect of the exchange of supplementary information where there was a hit before the end of the transition period on an alert issued in the Schengen Information System, provided its provisions apply to the United Kingdom on the last day of the transition period. By way of derogation from Article 8 of this Agreement, the United Kingdom shall be entitled to use, for no longer than 3 months after the end of the transition period, the Communication Infrastructure as referred to in Article 8(1) of Decision 2007/533/JHA to the extent strictly necessary for the purpose of exchanging such supplementary information. The United Kingdom shall reimburse the Union for the actual costs incurred by the Union as a consequence of facilitating the United Kingdom's use of the Communication Infrastructure. The Union shall communicate to the United Kingdom the amount of those costs by 31
arch 2021. In the event that the communicated amount of the actual costs incurred considerably diverge
from the best estimates amount that was communicated by the Union to the United Kingdom before the signature of this Agreement, the United Kingdom shall pay without delay to the Union the best estimates amount and the Joint Committee shall determine the manner in which the difference between the actual costs incurred and the best estimates amount is to be addressed.

Council Framework Decision 2006/960/JHA of 18 December 2006 on simplifying the exchange of information and intelligence between law enforcement authorities of the Member States of the European Union (OJ L 386, 29.12.2006, p. 89).
Council Decision 2007/533/JHA of 12 June 2007 on the establishment, operation and use of the second generation Schengen Information System (SIS II) (OJ L 205, 7.8.2007, p. 63).
& /en 114 (f) Council Decision 2007/845/JHA
shall apply in respect of requests received before the end of the transition period by an Asset Recovery Office;
(g) Directive (EU) 2016/681 of the European Parliament and of the Council
shall apply in respect of requests received by the passenger information unit in accordance with Articles 9 and 10 of that Directive before the end of the transition period
2. By way of derogation from Article 8, the United Kingdom shall be entitled to use, for no longer than one year after the end of the transition period, the Secure Information Exchange Network Application (SIENA) to the extent strictly necessary to complete the ongoing procedures referred to in points (c), (d), (f) and (g) of paragraph 1 of this Article. The United Kingdom shall reimburse the Union for the actual costs incurred by the Union as a consequence of facilitating the United Kingdom's use of SIENA. The Union shall communicate to the United Kingdom the amount of those costs by 31 March 2021. In the event that the communicated amount of the actual costs incurred considerably diverge
from the best estimates amount that was communicated by the Union to the United Kingdom before the signature of this Agreement, the United Kingdom shall pay without delay to the Union the best estimates amount and the Joint Committee shall determine the manner in which the difference between the actual costs incurred and the best estimates amount is to be addressed.

Council Decision 2007/845/JHA of 6 December 2007 concerning cooperation between Asset Recovery Offices of the Member States in the field of tracing and identification of proceeds from, or other property related to, crime (OJ L 332, 18.12.2007, p. 103).
Directive (EU) 2016/681 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the use of passenger name record (PNR) data for the prevention, detection, investigation and prosecution of terrorist offences and serious crime (OJ L 119, 4.5.2016, p. 132).
& /en 115 ARTICLE 64
Confirmation of receipt or arrest
1. The competent issuing or requesting authority may request an acknowledgement of the receipt of a judicial decision or request referred to in points (a), (c) to (e), (f)(i) and (h) to (l) of Article 62(1) and points (a)(i) and (ii), points (b)(i) to (v) and (vii), (viii) and (ix), and points (c), (d), (f) and (g) of Article 63(1) within 10 days after the end of the transition period where it has doubts as to whether such a judicial decision or request was received by the executing or requested authority before the end of the transition period.
2. In the cases referred to in point (b) of Article 62(1), where the competent issuing judicial authority has doubts as to whether the requested person was arrested pursuant to Article 11 of Framework Decision 2002/584/JHA before the end of the transition period, it may request from the competent executing judicial authority a confirmation of the arrest within 10 days after the end of the transition period.
& /en 116 3. Unless confirmation has already been provided pursuant to the applicable provisions of Union law, the executing or requested authority referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 shall reply to a request for confirmation of receipt or arrest within 10 days after receiving the request.
ARTICLE 65
Other applicable Union acts
Directive 2010/64/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council
and Directive 2012/13/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council
shall apply in respect of the proceedings referred to in point (b) of Article 62(1) of this Agreement.

Directive 2010/64/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 20 October 2010 on the right to interpretation and translation in criminal proceedings (OJ L 280, 26.10.2010, p. 1).
Directive 2012/13/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 May 2012 on the right to information in criminal proceedings (OJ L 142, 1.6.2012, p. 1).
& /en 117 TITLE VI
ONGOING JUDICIAL COOPERATION IN CIVIL AND COMMERCIAL MATTERS
ARTICLE 66
Applicable law in contractual and non-contractual matters
In the United Kingdom, the following acts shall apply as follows:
(a) Regulation (EC) No 593/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council
shall apply in respect of contracts concluded before the end of the transition period;
(b) Regulation (EC) No 864/2007 of the European Parliament and of the Council
shall apply in respect of events giving rise to damage, where such events occurred before the end of the transition period.

Regulation (EC) No 593/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 17 June 2008 on the law applicable to contractual obligations (Rome I) (OJ L 177, 4.7.2008, p. 6)
2 Regulation (EC) No 864/2007 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 July 2007 on the law applicable to non-contractual obligations (Rome II) (OJ L 199, 31.7.2007, p. 40).
& /en 118 ARTICLE 67
Jurisdiction, recognition and enforcement of judicial decisions,  and related cooperation between central authorities
1. In the United Kingdom, as well as in the Member States in situations involving the United Kingdom, in respect of legal proceedings instituted before the end of the transition period and in respect of proceedings or actions that are related to such legal proceedings pursuant to Articles 29, 30 and 31 of Regulation (EU) No 1215/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council1, Article 19 of Regulation (EC) No 2201/2003 or Articles 12 and 13 of Council Regulation (EC) No 4/20092, the following acts or provisions shall apply:
(a) the provisions regarding jurisdiction of Regulation (EU) No 1215/2012;

Regulation (EU) No 1215/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 December 2012 on jurisdiction and the recognition and enforcement of judgments in civil and commercial matters (OJ L 351, 20.12.2012, p. 1).
Council Regulation (EC) No 4/2009 of 18 December 2008 on jurisdiction, applicable law, recognition and enforcement of decisions and cooperation in matters relating to maintenance obligations (OJ L 7, 10.1.2009, p. 1).
& /en 119 (b) the provisions regarding jurisdiction of Regulation (EU) 2017/1001, of Regulation (EC) No 6/2002, of Regulation (EC) No 2100/94, of Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council
and of Directive 96/71/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council
(c) the provisions of Regulation (EC) No 2201/2003 regarding jurisdiction;
(d) the provisions of Regulation (EC) No 4/2009 regarding jurisdiction.
2. In the United Kingdom, as well as in the Member States in situations involving the United Kingdom, the following acts or provisions shall apply as follows in respect of the recognition and enforcement of judgments, decisions, authentic instruments, court settlements and agreements:
(a) Regulation (EU) No 1215/2012 shall apply to the recognition and enforcement of judgments given in legal proceedings instituted before the end of the transition period, and to authentic instruments formally drawn up or registered and court settlements approved or concluded before the end of the transition period;

Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data, and repealing Directive 95/46/EC (General Data Protection Regulation) (OJ L 119, 4.5.2016, p. 1).
Directive 96/71/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 December 1996 concerning the posting of workers in the framework of the provision of services (OJ L 18, 21.1.1997, p. 1).
& /en 120 (b) the provisions of Regulation (EC) No 2201/2003 regarding recognition and enforcement shall apply to judgments given in legal proceedings instituted before the end of the transition period, and to documents formally drawn up or registered as authentic instruments, and agreements concluded before the end of the transition period;
(c) the provisions of Regulation (EC) No 4/2009 regarding recognition and enforcement shall apply to decisions given in legal proceedings instituted before the end of the transition period, and to court settlements approved or concluded, and authentic instruments established before the end of the transition period;
(d) Regulation (EC) No 805/2004 of the European Parliament and of the Council
shall apply to judgments given in legal proceedings instituted before the end of the transition period, and to court settlements approved or concluded and authentic instruments drawn up before the end of the transition period, provided that the certification as a European Enforcement Order was applied for before the end of the transition period.

Regulation (EC) No 805/2004 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 21 April 2004 creating a European Enforcement Order for uncontested claims (OJ L 143, 30.4.2004, p. 15).
& /en 121 3. In the United Kingdom, as well as in the Member States in situations involving the United Kingdom, the following provisions shall apply as follows:
(a) Chapter IV of Regulation (EC) No 2201/2003 shall apply to requests and applications received by the central authority or other competent authority of the requested State before the end of the transition period;
(b) Chapter VII of Regulation (EC) No 4/2009 shall apply to applications for recognition or enforcement as referred to in point (c) of paragraph 2 of this Article and requests received by the central authority of the requested State before the end of the transition period;
(c) Regulation (EU) 2015/848 of the European Parliament and of the Council
shall apply to insolvency proceedings, and actions referred to in Article 6(1) of that Regulation, provided that the main proceedings were opened before the end of the transition period;

Regulation (EU) 2015/848 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 20 May 2015 on insolvency proceedings (OJ L 141, 5.6.2015, p. 19).
& /en 122 (d) Regulation (EC) No 1896/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council
shall apply to European payment orders applied for before the end of the transition period; where, following such an application, the proceedings are transferred according to Article 17(1) of that Regulation, the proceedings shall be deemed to have been instituted before the end of the transition period;
(e) Regulation (EC) No 861/2007 of the European Parliament and of the Council
shall apply to small claims procedures for which the application was lodged before the end of the transition period;
(f) Regulation (EU) No 606/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council
shall apply to certificates issued before the end of the transition period.

Regulation (EC) No 1896/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 December 2006 creating a European order for payment procedure (OJ L 399, 30.12.2006, p. 1).
Regulation (EC) No 861/2007 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 July 2007 establishing a European Small Claims Procedure (OJ L 199, 31.7.2007, p. 1).
Regulation (EU) No 606/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 June 2013 on mutual recognition of protection measures in civil matters (OJ L 181, 29.6.2013, p. 4).
& /en 123 ARTICLE 68
Ongoing judicial cooperation procedures
In the United Kingdom, as well as in the Member States in situations involving the United Kingdom, the following acts shall apply as follows:
(a) Regulation (EC) No 1393/2007 of the European Parliament and of the Council
shall apply to judicial and extrajudicial documents which were received for the purposes of service before the end of the transition period by one of the following:
(i) a receiving agency;
(ii) a central body of the State where the service is to be effected; or
(iii) diplomatic or consular agents, postal services or judicial officers, officials or other competent persons of the State addressed, as referred to in Articles 13, 14 and 15 of that Regulation;

Regulation (EC) No 1393/2007 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 November 2007 on the service in the Member States of judicial and extrajudicial documents in civil or commercial matters (service of documents), and repealing Council Regulation (EC) No 1348/2000 (OJ L 324, 10.12.2007, p. 79).
& /en 124 (b) Council Regulation (EC) No 1206/2001
shall apply to requests received before the end of the transition period by one of the following:
(i) a requested court;
(ii) a central body of the State where the taking of evidence is requested; or
(iii) a central body or competent authority referred to in Article 17(1) of that Regulation;
(c) Council Decision 2001/470/EC
shall apply to requests that were received before the end of the transition period; the requesting contact point may request an acknowledgement of receipt within 7 days of the end of the transition period where it has doubts as to whether the request was received before the end of the transition period.

Council Regulation (EC) No 1206/2001 of 28 May 2001 on cooperation between the courts of the Member States in the taking of evidence in civil or commercial matters (OJ
174, 27.6.2001, p. 1).
Council Decision 2001/470/EC of 28 May 2001 establishing a European Judicial Network in civil and commercial matters (OJ L 174, 27.6.2001, p. 25).
& /en 125 ARTICLE 69
Other applicable provisions
1. In the United Kingdom, as well as in the Member States in situations involving the United Kingdom, the following acts shall apply as follows:
(a) Council Directive 2003/8/EC
shall apply to applications for legal aid that were received by the receiving authority before the end of the transition period. The requesting authority may request an acknowledgement of receipt within 7 days of the end of the transition period where it has doubts as to whether the request was received before that date;
(b) Directive 2008/52/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council
shall apply where, before the end of the transition period:
(i) the parties agreed to use mediation after the dispute had arisen;

Council Directive 2003/8/EC of 27 January 2003 to improve access to justice in cross-border disputes by establishing minimum common rules relating to legal aid for such disputes (OJ L 26, 31.1.2003, p. 41).
Directive 2008/52/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 21 May 2008 on certain aspects of mediation in civil and commercial matters (OJ L 136, 24.5.2008, p. 3).
& /en 126 (ii) mediation was ordered by the court; or
(iii) a court invited the parties to use mediation;
(c) Council Directive 2004/80/EC
shall apply to applications received by the deciding authority before the end of the transition period.
2. Point (a) of paragraph 1, point (a) of paragraph 2 and point (a) of paragraph 3 of Article 67 of this Agreement shall also apply in respect of the provisions of Regulation (EU) No 1215/2012 as applicable by virtue of the agreement between the European Community and the Kingdom of Denmark on jurisdiction and the recognition and enforcement of judgments in civil and commercial matters
3. Point (a) of Article 68 of this Agreement shall also apply with regard to the provisions of Regulation (EC) No 1393/2007 as applicable by virtue of the agreement between the European Community and the Kingdom of Denmark on the service of judicial and extrajudicial documents in civil and commercial matters


Council Directive 2004/80/EC of 29
pril 2004 relating to compensation to crime victims (OJ L 261, 6.8.2004, p. 15).
OJ L 299, 16.11.2005, p. 62.
OJ L 300 17.11.2005, p. 55.
& /en 127 TITLE VII
DATA AND INFORMATION PROCESSED OR OBTAINED  BEFORE THE END OF THE TRANSITION PERIOD,  OR ON THE BASIS OF THIS AGREEMENT
ARTICLE 70
Definition
For the purposes of this Title, "Union law on the protection of personal data" means:
(a) Regulation (EU) 2016/679, with the exception of Chapter VII thereof;
(b) Directive (EU) 2016/680 of the European Parliament and of the Council

Directive (EU) 2016/680 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data by competent authorities for the purposes of the prevention, investigation, detection or prosecution of criminal offences or the execution of criminal penalties, and on the free movement of such data, and repealing Council Framework Decision 2008/977/JHA (OJ
119, 4.5.2016, p. 89).
& /en 128 (c) Directive 2002/58/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council
(d) any other provisions of Union law governing the protection of personal data.
ARTICLE 71
Protection of personal data
1. Union law on the protection of personal data shall apply in the United Kingdom in respect of the processing of personal data of data subjects outside the United Kingdom, provided that the personal data:
(a) were processed under Union law in the United Kingdom before the end of the transition period; or
(b) are processed in the United Kingdom after the end of the transition period on the basis of this Agreement.

Directive 2002/58/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 July 2002 concerning the processing of personal data and the protection of privacy in the electronic communications sector (Directive on privacy and electronic communications) (OJ L 201, 31.7.2002 p. 37).
& /en 129 2. Paragraph 1 shall not apply to the extent the processing of the personal data referred to therein is subject to an adequate level of protection as established in applicable decisions under Article 45(3) of Regulation (EU) 2016/679 or Article 36(3) of Directive (EU) 2016/680.
3. To the extent that a decision referred to in paragraph 2 has ceased to be applicable, the United Kingdom shall ensure a level of protection of personal data essentially equivalent to that under Union law on the protection of personal data in respect of the processing of personal data of data subjects referred to in paragraph 1.
ARTICLE 72
Confidential treatment and restricted use of data and information  in the United Kingdom
Without prejudice to Article 71, in addition to Union law on the protection of personal data, the provisions of Union law on confidential treatment, restriction of use, storage limitation and requirement to erase data and information shall apply in respect of data and information obtained by authorities or official bodies of or in the United Kingdom or by contracting entities
as defined in Article 4 of Directive 2014/25/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council
that are of or in the United Kingdom:
(a) before the end of the transition period; or

Directive 2014/25/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 February 2014 on procurement by entities operating in the water, energy, transport and postal services sectors and repealing Directive 2004/17/EC, OJ L 94, 28.3.2014, p. 243.
& /en 130 (b) on the basis of this Agreement.
ARTICLE 73
Treatment of data and information obtained from the United Kingdom
The Union shall not treat data and information obtained from the United Kingdom before the end of the transition period, or obtained after the end of the transition period on the basis of this Agreement, differently from data and information obtained from a Member State, on the sole ground of the United Kingdom having withdrawn from the Union.
& /en 131 ARTICLE 74
Information security
1. The provisions of Union law on the protection of EU classified information and Euratom classified information shall apply in respect of classified information that was obtained by the United Kingdom either before the end of the transition period or on the basis of this Agreement or that was obtained from the United Kingdom by the Union or a Member State either before the end of the transition period or on the basis of this Agreement.
2. The obligations resulting from Union law regarding industrial security shall apply to the United Kingdom in cases where the tendering, contracting or grant award procedure for the classified contract, classified subcontract or classified grant agreement was launched before the end of the transition period.
3. The United Kingdom shall ensure that cryptographic products that use classified cryptographic algorithms developed under the control of, and evaluated and approved by the Crypto Approval Authority of a Member State or of the United Kingdom, which have been approved by the Union by the end of the transition period and that are present in the United Kingdom, are not transferred to a third country.
4. Any requirements, limitations and conditions set out in the Union approval of cryptographic products shall apply to those products.
& /en 132 TITLE VIII
ONGOING PUBLIC PROCUREMENT AND SIMILAR PROCEDURES
& /en 133 ARTICLE 75
Definition
For the purposes of this Title, "relevant rules" means the general principles of Union law applicable to the award of public contracts, Directives 2009/81/EC1, 2014/23/EU2, 2014/24/EU
and 2014/25/EU
of the European Parliament and of the Council, Regulations (EC) No 2195/2002
and (EC) No 1370/2007
of the European Parliament and of the Council, Article 4 of Council Regulation (EEC) No 3577/927, Articles 11 and 12 of Council Directive 96/67/EC8, Articles 16, 17 and 18 of Regulation (EC) 1008/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council9, Articles 6 and 7 of Regulation (EU) 2017/352 of the European Parliament and of the Council10, and any other specific provisions of Union law governing public procurement procedures.

Directive 2009/81/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 July 2009 on the coordination of procedures for the award of certain works contracts, supply contracts and service contracts by contracting authorities or entities in the fields of defence and security, and amending Directives 2004/17/EC and 2004/18/EC (OJ L 216, 20.8, 2009, p.76).
Directive 2014/23/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 February 2014 on the award of concession contracts (OJ L 94, 28.3.2014, p. 1).
Directive 2014/24/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 February 2014 on public procurement and repealing Directive 2004/18/EC (OJ L 94, 28.3.2014, p. 65).
Directive 2014/25/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 February 2014 on procurement by entities operating in the water, energy, transport and postal services sectors and repealing Directive 2004/17/EC (OJ L 94, 28.3.2014, p. 243).
Regulation (EC) No 2195/2002 of the European Parliament and of the Council of
November 2002 on the Common Procurement Vocabulary (CPV) (OJ L 340, 16.12.2002, p. 1).
Regulation (EC) No 1370/2007 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 October 2007 on public passenger transport services by rail and by road and repealing Council Regulations (EEC) Nos 1191/69 and 1107/70 (OJ L 315, 3.12.2007, p. 1).
Council Regulation (EEC) No 3577/92 of 7 December 1992 applying the principle of freedom to provide services to maritime transport within Member States (maritime cabotage) (OJ
364, 12.12.1992, p. 7).
Council Directive 96/67/EC of 15 October 1996 on access to the groundhandling market at Community airports (OJ L 272, 25.10.1996, p. 36).
Regulation (EC) 1008/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 September 2008 on common rules for the operation of air services in the Community (OJ
293, 31.10.2008, p. 3). 10 Regulation (EU) 2017/352 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 February 2017 establishing a framework for the provision of port services and common rules on the financial transparency of ports (OJ L 57, 3.3.2017, p. 1).
& /en 134 ARTICLE 76
Rules applicable to ongoing procedures
1. The relevant rules shall apply:
(a) without prejudice to point (b), in respect of procedures launched by contracting authorities or contracting entities from the Member States or the United Kingdom under those rules before the end of the transition period and not yet finalised on the last day of the transition period, including procedures using dynamic purchasing systems as well as procedures for which the call for competition takes the form of a prior information notice or periodic indicative notice or a notice on the existence of a qualification system; and
(b) in respect of the procedures referred to in Article 29(2), (3) and (4) of Directive 2009/81/EC, Article 33(2) to (5) of Directive 2014/24/EC and Article 51(2) of Directive 2014/25/EC which relate to the performance of the following framework agreements concluded by contracting authorities or contracting entities from the Member States or the United Kingdom, including the award of contracts based on such framework agreements:
(i) framework agreements concluded before the end of the transition period that have neither expired nor been terminated on the last day of the transition period; or
& /en 135 (ii) framework agreements concluded after the end of the transition period in accordance with a procedure that falls under point (a) of this paragraph.
2. Without prejudice to the application of any restriction in accordance with Union law, the non-discrimination principle shall be complied with by contracting authorities and contracting entities with regard to tenderers or, as applicable, persons who are otherwise entitled to submit applications, from the Member States and the United Kingdom in relation to the procedures referred to in paragraph 1.
3. A procedure referred to in paragraph 1 shall be considered to have been launched when a call for competition or any other invitation to submit applications has been made in accordance with the relevant rules. Where the relevant rules allow for the use of procedures that do not require the use of a call for competition or other invitations to submit applications, the procedure shall be considered to have been launched when the contracting authority or contracting entity contacted economic operators in relation to the specific procedure
4. A procedure referred to in paragraph 1 shall be considered finalised:
(a) upon publication of a contract award notice in accordance with the relevant rules or, where those rules do not require the publication of a contract award notice, upon conclusion of the relevant contract; or
& /en 136 (b) upon informing tenderers or persons otherwise entitled to submit applications, as the case may be, of the reasons why the contract was not awarded, if the contracting authority or contracting entity decided not to award a contract.
5. This Article shall not affect Union or United Kingdom rules on customs, the movement of goods, the provision of services, the recognition of professional qualifications or intellectual property.
ARTICLE 77
Review procedures
Council Directives 89/665/EEC
and 92/13/EEC
shall apply in respect of the public procurement procedures referred to in Article 76 of this Agreement which fall within the scope of those Directives.

Council Directive 89/665/EEC of 21 December 1989 on the coordination of the laws, regulations and administrative provisions relating to the application of review procedures to the award of public supply and public works contracts (OJ L 395, 30.12.1989, p. 33).
Council Directive 92/13/EEC of 25 February 1992 coordinating the laws, regulations and administrative provisions relating to the application of Community rules on the procurement procedures of entities operating in the water, energy, transport and telecommunications sectors (OJ L 76, 23.3.92, p. 14).
& /en 137 ARTICLE 78
Cooperation
By way of derogation from Article 8 of this Agreement, Article 61(2) of Directive 2014/24/EU shall apply for a period not exceeding 9 months from the end of the transition period in respect of the procedures under that Directive that were launched by contracting authorities from the United Kingdom before the end of the transition period and were not yet finalised on the last day of the transition period.
& /en 138 TITLE IX
EURATOM RELATED ISSUES
ARTICLE 79
Definitions
For the purposes of this Title, the following definitions shall apply:
(a) "Community" means the European Atomic Energy Community;
(b) "safeguards" means activities to verify that nuclear material and equipment are not diverted from their intended use as declared by the users and activities to verify that international legal obligations to use nuclear material and equipment for peaceful purposes are honoured;
(c) "special fissile materials" means special fissile materials as defined in point (1) of Article 197 of the Euratom Treaty;
(d) "ores" means ores as defined in point (4) of Article 197 of the Euratom Treaty;
& /en 139 (e) "source materials" means source materials as defined in point (3) of Article 197 of the Euratom Treaty;
(f) "nuclear material" means ores, source materials and special fissile materials;
(g) "spent fuel
and "radioactive waste" mean spent fuel and radioactive waste as defined in points (7) and (11) of Article3 of Council Directive 2011/70/Euratom

ARTICLE 80
End of Community responsibility for matters related to the United Kingdom
1. The United Kingdom shall have sole responsibility for ensuring that all ores, source materials and special fissile materials covered by the Euratom Treaty and present on the territory of the United Kingdom at the end of the transition period are handled in accordance with relevant and applicable international treaties and conventions, including but not limited to international treaties and conventions on nuclear safety, safeguards, non-proliferation and physical protection of nuclear materials, and international treaties and conventions on safety of spent fuel management and the safety of radioactive waste management.

Council Directive 2011/70/Euratom of 19 July 2011 establishing a Community framework for the responsible and safe management of spent fuel and radioactive waste (OJ L 199, 2.8.2011, p. 48).
& /en 140 2. The United Kingdom shall have sole responsibility for ensuring its compliance with international obligations arising as a consequence of its membership of the International Atomic Energy Agency or as a consequence of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons or any other relevant international treaties or conventions to which the United Kingdom is a party.
ARTICLE 81
Safeguards
The United Kingdom shall implement a safeguards regime. This safeguards regime shall apply a system offering equivalent effectiveness and coverage as that provided by the Community in the territory of the United Kingdom in line with the Agreement between the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the European Atomic Energy Community and the International Atomic Energy Agency for the Application of Safeguards in the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland in Connection with the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons [INFCIRC/263], as amended.
& /en 141 ARTICLE 82
Specific obligations under international agreements
The United Kingdom shall ensure that any specific obligations under agreements concluded by the Community with third countries or international organisations in relation to any nuclear equipment, nuclear material or other nuclear items present on the territory of the United Kingdom at the end of the transition period are fulfilled, or otherwise identify appropriate arrangements in agreement with the third country or international organisation concerned.
ARTICLE 83
Ownership and rights of use and consumption  of special fissile materials in the United Kingdom
1. Special fissile materials present on the territory of the United Kingdom in respect of which Article 86 of the Euratom Treaty applied until the end of the transition period shall cease to be the property of the Community at the end of the transition period.
2. Special fissile materials referred to in paragraph 1 shall become the property of the persons or undertakings that had unlimited right of use and consumption of those materials at the end of the transition period in accordance with Article 87 of the Euratom Treaty.
& /en 142 3. Where the right of use and consumption of special fissile materials referred to in paragraph 2
materials concerned") is with a Member State, or with persons or undertakings established in the territory of a Member State, in order to protect the integrity of the common supply policy established under Chapter 6 of Title II of the Euratom Treaty and of the nuclear common market established under Chapter 9 of that Title, including with regard to the level of safeguards applicable to the materials concerned, the following shall apply:
(a) having regard to Article 5 of this Agreement, the Community shall have the right to require that the materials concerned be deposited with the Agency established under point (b) of Article 52(2) of the Euratom Treaty or in other stores which are or can be supervised by the European Commission;
(b) the Community shall have the right to conclude contracts relating to the supply of the materials concerned to any person or undertaking established in the territory of the United Kingdom or in a third country in accordance with Article 52(2) of the Euratom Treaty;
(c) Article 20 of Commission Regulation (Euratom) No 302/20051, with the exception of points (b) and (c) of paragraph 1, shall apply in respect of the materials concerned;

Commission Regulation (Euratom) No 302/2005 of 8 February 2005 on the application of Euratom safeguards (OJ L 54, 28.2.2005, p. 1).
& /en 143 (d) the export of the materials concerned to a third country shall be authorised by the competent authorities of the Member State in which the person or undertaking with the right to use and consume the materials concerned is established in accordance with Article 9(2) of Council Regulation (EC) No 428/2009
(e) in respect of the materials concerned, the Community shall have the right to exert any other rights arising under the Euratom Treaty from ownership pursuant to Article 86 of that Treaty.
4. Member States, persons or undertakings that have the unlimited right of use and consumption of special fissile materials present on the territory of the United Kingdom at the end of the transition period shall retain that right.

Council Regulation (EC) No 428/2009 of 5 May 2009 setting up a Community regime for the control of exports, transfer, brokering and transit of dual-use items (OJ L 134, 29.5.2009, p. 1).
& /en 144 ARTICLE 84
Equipment and other property related to the provision of safeguards
1. Community equipment and other property related to the provision of safeguards under the Euratom Treaty located in the United Kingdom at the end of the transition period, as set out at Annex V, shall become the property of the United Kingdom. The United Kingdom shall reimburse to the Union the value of that equipment and other property, the calculation of which shall be based on the value assigned to that equipment and other property in the consolidated accounts for the year 2020.
2. The United Kingdom shall assume all of the Community's rights, liabilities and obligations associated with the equipment and other property referred to in paragraph 1.
ARTICLE 85
Spent fuel and radioactive waste
Article 4(1) and (2) and the first subparagraph of Article 4(4) of Directive 2011/70/Euratom shall apply in respect of the United Kingdom's ultimate responsibility for spent fuel and radioactive waste that was generated in the United Kingdom and is present on the territory of a Member State at the end of the transition period.
& /en 145 TITLE X
UNION JUDICIAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES
CHAPTER
JUDICIAL PROCEDURES
ARTICLE 86
Pending cases before the Court of Justice of the European Union
1. The Court of Justice of the European Union shall continue to have jurisdiction in any proceedings brought by or against the United Kingdom before the end of the transition period. Such jurisdiction shall apply to all stages of proceedings, including appeal proceedings before the Court of Justice and proceedings before the General Court where the case is referred back to the General Court.
2. The Court of Justice of the European Union shall continue to have jurisdiction to give preliminary rulings on requests from courts and tribunals of the United Kingdom made before the end of the transition period.
& /en 146 3. For the purposes of this Chapter, proceedings shall be considered as having been brought before the Court of Justice of the European Union, and requests for preliminary rulings shall be considered as having been made, at the moment at which the document initiating the proceedings has been registered by the registry of the Court of Justice or the General Court, as the case may be.
ARTICLE 87
New cases before the Court of Justice
1. If the European Commission considers that the United Kingdom has failed to fulfil an obligation under the Treaties or under Part Four of this Agreement before the end of the transition period, the European Commission may, within 4 years after the end of the transition period, bring the matter before the Court of Justice of the European Union in accordance with the requirements laid down in Article 258 TFEU or the second subparagraph of Article 108(2) TFEU, as the case may be. The Court of Justice of the European Union shall have jurisdiction over such cases.
& /en 147 2. If the United Kingdom does not comply with a decision referred to in Article 95(1) of this Agreement, or fails to give legal effect in the United Kingdom's legal order to a decision, as referred to in that provision, that was addressed to a natural or legal person residing or established in the United Kingdom, the European Commission may, within 4 years from the date of the decision concerned, bring the matter to the Court of Justice of the European Union in accordance with the procedural requirements laid down in Article 258 TFEU or the second subparagraph of Article 108(2) TFEU, as the case may be. The Court of Justice of the European Union shall have jurisdiction over such cases.
3. In deciding to bring matters under this Article, the European Commission shall apply the same principles in respect of the United Kingdom as in respect of any Member State.
ARTICLE 88
Procedural rules
The provisions of Union law governing the procedure before the Court of Justice of the European Union shall apply in respect of the proceedings and requests for preliminary rulings referred to in this Title.
& /en 148 ARTICLE 89
Binding force and enforceability of judgments and orders
1. Judgments and orders of the Court of Justice of the European Union handed down before the end of the transition period, as well as such judgments and orders handed down after the end of the transition period in proceedings referred to in Articles 86 and 87, shall have binding force in their entirety on and in the United Kingdom.
2. If, in a judgment referred to in paragraph 1, the Court of Justice of the European Union finds that the United Kingdom has failed to fulfil an obligation under the Treaties or this Agreement, the United Kingdom shall take the necessary measures to comply with that judgment.
3. Articles 280 and 299 TFEU shall apply in the United Kingdom in respect of the enforcement of the judgments and orders of the Court of Justice of the European Union referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article.
& /en 149 ARTICLE 90
Right to intervene and participate in the procedure
Until the judgments and orders of the Court of Justice of the European Union in all proceedings and requests for preliminary rulings referred to in Article 86 have become final, the United Kingdom may intervene in the same way as a Member State or, in the cases brought before the Court of Justice of the European Union in accordance with Article 267 TFEU, participate in the procedure before the Court of Justice of the European Union in the same way as a Member State. During that period, the Registrar of the Court of Justice of the European Union shall notify the United Kingdom, at the same time and in the same manner as the Member States, of any case referred to the Court of Justice of the European Union for a preliminary ruling by a court or tribunal of a Member State.
The United Kingdom may also intervene or participate in the procedure before the Court of Justice of the European Union in the same way as a Member State:
(a) in relation to cases which concern a failure to fulfil obligations under the Treaties, where the United Kingdom was subject to the same obligations before the end of the transition period, and where such cases are brought before the Court of Justice of the European Union in accordance with Articles 258 TFEU before the end of the period referred to in Article 87(1) or, as the case may be, until the moment, after the end of that period, at which the last judgment or order rendered by the Court of Justice of the European Union on the basis of Article 87(1) has become final;
& /en 150 (b) in relation to cases which concern acts or provisions of Union law which were applicable before the end of the transition period to and in the United Kingdom and which are brought before Court of Justice of the European Union in accordance with Article 267 TFEU before the end of the period referred to in Article 87(1) or, as the case may be, until the moment, after the end of that period, at which the last judgment or order rendered by the Court of Justice on the basis of Article 87(1) has become final; and
(c) in relation to the cases referred to in Article 95(3).
ARTICLE 91
Representation before the Court
1. Without prejudice to Article 88, where, before the end of the transition period, a lawyer authorised to practise before the courts or tribunals of the United Kingdom represented or assisted a party in proceedings before the Court of Justice of the European Union or in relation to requests for preliminary rulings made before the end of the transition period, that lawyer may continue to represent or assist that party in those proceedings or in relation to those requests. This right shall apply to all stages of proceedings, including appeal proceedings before the Court of Justice and proceedings before the General Court after a case has been referred back to it.
& /en 151 2. Without prejudice to Article 88, lawyers authorised to practise before the courts or tribunals of the United Kingdom may represent or assist a party before the Court of Justice of the European Union in the cases referred to in Article 87 and Article 95(3). Lawyers authorised to practise before the courts or tribunals of the United Kingdom may also represent or assist the United Kingdom in the proceedings covered by Article 90 in which the United Kingdom has decided to intervene or participate.
3. When representing or assisting a party before the Court of Justice of the European Union in the cases referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2, lawyers authorised to practise before the courts or tribunals of the United Kingdom shall in every respect be treated as lawyers authorised to practise before courts or tribunals of Member States representing or assisting a party before the Court of Justice of the European Union.
& /en 152 CHAPTER
ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES
ARTICLE 92
Ongoing administrative procedures
1. The institutions, bodies, offices and agencies of the Union shall continue to be competent for administrative procedures which were initiated before the end of the transition period concerning:
(a) compliance with Union law by the United Kingdom, or by natural or legal persons residing or established in the United Kingdom; or
(b) compliance with Union law relating to competition in the United Kingdom.
2. Without prejudice to paragraph 3, for the purposes of this Chapter an administrative procedure shall be considered as having been initiated at the moment at which it has been formally registered with the Union institution, body, office or agency.
& /en 153 3. For the purposes of this Chapter:
(a) an administrative procedure on State aid governed by Council Regulation (EU) 2015/1589
shall be considered as having been initiated at the moment at which the procedure has been allocated a case number;
(b) proceedings for the application of Article 101 or 102 TFEU conducted by the European Commission under Council Regulation (EC) No 1/2003
shall be considered as having been initiated at the moment at which the European Commission has decided to initiate proceedings in accordance with Article 2(1) of Commission Regulation (EC) No 773/2004

Council Regulation (EU) 2015/1589 of 13 July 2015 laying down detailed rules for the application of Article 108 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (OJ
248, 24.9.2015, p. 9).
Council Regulation (EC) No 1/2003 of 16 December 2002 on the implementation of the rules on competition laid down in Articles 81 and 82 of the Treaty (OJ L 1, 4.1.2003, p. 1).
Commission Regulation (EC) No 773/2004 of 7 April 2004 relating to the conduct of proceedings by the Commission pursuant to Articles 81 and 82 of the EC Treaty (OJ
123, 27.4.2004, p. 18).
& /en 154 (c) proceedings in connection with the control of concentrations between undertakings governed by Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004
shall be considered as having been initiated at the moment at which:
(i) a concentration of Union dimension has been notified to the European Commission in accordance with Articles 1, 3 and 4 of Regulation (EC) No 139/2004;
(ii) the time limit of 15 working days referred to in Article 4(5) of Regulation (EC) No 139/2004 has expired without any of the Member States competent to examine the concentration under their national competition law having expressed its disagreement as regards the request to refer the case to the European Commission; or
(iii) the European Commission has decided, or is deemed to have decided, to examine the concentration in accordance with Article 22(3) of Regulation (EC) No 139/2004;

Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004 of 20 January 2004 on the control of concentrations between undertakings (OJ L 24, 29.1.2004, p. 1).
& /en 155 (d) an investigation by the European Securities and Markets Authority of an alleged infringement listed in Annex III to Regulation (EC) No 1060/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council
or Annex I to Regulation (EU) No 648/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council
shall be considered as having been initiated at the moment at which that Authority has appointed an independent investigating officer in accordance with Article 23e(1) of Regulation (EC) No 1060/2009 or Article 64(1) of Regulation (EU) No 648/2012.
4. The Union shall provide the United Kingdom with a list of all individual ongoing administrative procedures that fall within the scope of paragraph 1 within 3 months after the end of the transition period. By way of derogation from the first sentence, in the case of individual ongoing administrative procedures of the European Banking Authority, the European Securities and Markets Authority, and the European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority, the Union shall provide the United Kingdom with a list of such ongoing administrative procedures within 1 month after the end of the transition period.

Regulation (EC) No 1060/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 September 2009 on credit rating agencies (OJ L 302, 17.11.2009, p. 1).
Regulation (EU) No 648/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 4 July 2012 on OTC derivatives, central counterparties and trade repositories (OJ L 201, 27.7.2012, p. 1).
& /en 156 5. In an administrative procedure on State aid governed by Regulation (EU) 2015/1589, the European Commission shall be bound in relation to the United Kingdom by the applicable case law and best practices, as if the United Kingdom were still a Member State. In particular, the European Commission shall, within a reasonable period of time, adopt one of the following decisions:
(a) a decision finding that the measure does not constitute aid pursuant to Article 4(2) of Regulation (EU) 2015/1589;
(b) a decision not to raise objections pursuant to Article 4(3) of Regulation (EU) 2015/1589;
(c
a decision to initiate formal investigation proceedings pursuant to Article 4(4) of Regulation (EU) 2015/1589.
ARTICLE 93
New State aid and European Anti-Fraud Office procedures
1. In respect of aid granted before the end of the transition period, for a period of 4 years after the end of the transition period, the European Commission shall be competent to initiate new administrative procedures on State aid governed by Regulation (EU) 2015/1589 concerning the United Kingdom.
& /en 157 The European Commission shall continue to be competent after the end of the 4-year period for procedures initiated before the end of that period.
Article 92(5) of this Agreement shall apply mutatis mutandis
The European Commission shall inform the United Kingdom of any new administrative proceedings on State aid initiated under the first subparagraph of this paragraph within 3 months of initiating it.
2. Without prejudice to Articles 136 and 138 of this Agreement, for a period of 4 years after the end of the transition period, the European Anti-Fraud Office (OLAF) shall be competent to initiate new investigations governed by Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 883/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council
in respect of:
(a) facts that occurred before the end of the transition period; or
(b) any customs debt arising after the end of the transition period from the discharge procedures referred to in Article 49(1) of this Agreement.

Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 883/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 September 2013 concerning investigations conducted by the European Anti-Fraud Office (OLAF) and repealing Regulation (EC) No 1073/1999 of the European Parliament and of the Council and Council Regulation (Euratom) No 1074/1999 (OJ L 248, 18.9.2013, p. 1).
& /en 158 OLAF shall continue to be competent after the end of the 4-year period for procedures initiated before the end of that period.
OLAF shall inform the United Kingdom of any new investigation initiated under the first subparagraph of this paragraph within 3 months of initiating that investigation.
ARTICLE 94
Procedural rules
1. The provisions of Union law governing the different types of administrative procedures covered by this Chapter shall apply to the procedures referred to in Articles 92, 93 and 96
2. When representing or assisting a party in relation to the administrative procedures referred to in Articles 92 and 93, the lawyers authorised to practise before the courts or tribunals of the United Kingdom shall in every respect be treated as lawyers authorised to practise before courts or tribunals of Member States who represent or assist a party in relation to such administrative procedures.
3. Article 128(5) shall apply to the extent necessary for any procedures referred to in Articles 92 and 93 after the end of the transition period.
& /en 159 ARTICLE 95
Binding force and enforceability of decisions
1. Decisions adopted by institutions, bodies, offices and agencies of the Union before the end of the transition period, or adopted in the procedures referred to in Articles 92 and 93 after the end of the transition period, and addressed to the United Kingdom or to natural and legal persons residing or established in the United Kingdom, shall be binding on and in the United Kingdom.
2. Unless otherwise agreed between the European Commission and the designated national competition authority of the United Kingdom, the European Commission shall continue to be competent to monitor and enforce commitments given or remedies imposed in, or in relation to, the United Kingdom in connection with any proceedings for the application
Articles 101 or 102 TFEU conducted by the European Commission under Regulation (EC) No 1/2003 or proceedings conducted by the European Commission under Regulation (EC) No 139/2004 in connection with the control of concentrations between undertakings. If so agreed between the European Commission and the designated national competition authority of the United Kingdom, the European Commission shall transfer the monitoring and enforcement of such commitments or remedies in the United Kingdom to the designated national competition authority of the United Kingdom.
3. The legality of a decision referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article shall be reviewed exclusively by the Court of Justice of the European Union in accordance with Article 263 TFEU.
& /en 160 4. Article 299 TFEU shall apply in the United Kingdom in respect of the enforcement of decisions referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article that impose pecuniary obligations on natural and legal persons residing or established in the United Kingdom.
ARTICLE 96
Other ongoing procedures and reporting obligations
1. Technical examinations conducted by United Kingdom Examination Offices in cooperation with the Community Plant Variety Office pursuant to Regulation (EC) No 2100/94 which were ongoing on the day before the date of entry into force of this Agreement shall continue and be concluded in compliance with that Regulation.
& /en 161 2. Article 12(2a) and (3) and Articles 14, 15 and 16 of Directive 2003/87/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council
shall apply to and in the United Kingdom in respect of greenhouse gases emitted during the last year of the transition period.
3. Article 19 of Regulation (EU) No 517/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council
and Articles 26 and 27 of Regulation (EC) No 1005/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council
shall apply to and in the United Kingdom in respect of data reporting for the last year of the transition period.

Directive 2003/87/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 October 2003 establishing a system for greenhouse gas emission allowance trading within the Union and amending Council Directive 96/61/EC (OJ L 275, 25.10.2003, p. 32).
Regulation (EU) No 517/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 April 2014 on fluorinated greenhouse gases and repealing Regulation (EC) No 842/2006 (OJ L 150, 20.5.2014, p. 195).
Regulation (EC) No 1005/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 September 2009 on substances that deplete the ozone layer (OJ L 286, 31.10.2009, p. 1).
& /en 162 4. Article 8(1), (2), (3) and (7) of Regulation (EC) 443/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council1, and Annex II to that Regulation, and Article 8(1), (2), (3), (8) and (10) of Regulation (EU) 510/2011 of the European Parliament and of the Council2, and Annex II to that Regulation, as well as Articles 2 to 5, 7 and 8(2) and (3) of Commission Regulation (EU) No 1014/2010 and Articles 3 to 6 and 8 and Article 9(2) and (3) of Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) No 293/2012
shall apply to and in the United Kingdom in respect of the monitoring and reporting of relevant vehicle carbon dioxide emissions during the last year of the transition period.

Regulation (EC) No 443/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 April 2009 setting emission performance standards for new passenger cars as part of the Community's integrated approach to reduce CO 2 emissions from light-duty vehicles (OJ L 140, 5.6.2009, p. 1).
Regulation (EU) No 510/2011 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 May 2011 setting emission performance standards for new light commercial vehicles as part of the Union's integrated approach to reduce CO 2 emissions from light-duty vehicles (OJ L 145, 31.5.2011, p. 1).
Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) No 293/2012 of 3 April 2012 on monitoring and reporting of data on the registration of new light commercial vehicles pursuant to Regulation (EU) No 510/2011 of the European Parliament and of the Council (OJ L 98, 4.4.2012, p. 1).
& /en 163 5. Articles 5, 7, 9 and 10, Article 11(3), points (a) and (d) of Article 17(1), and Articles 19, 22 and 23 of Regulation (EU) No 525/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council
and Articles 3, 7 and 11 of Decision No 406/2009/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council
shall apply to the United Kingdom in respect of greenhouse gases emitted during 2019 and 2020, and Article 5 of Commission Regulation (EU) No 389/2013
shall apply to the United Kingdom until the closure of the second commitment period of the Kyoto Protocol.

Regulation (EU) No 525/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 21 May 2013 on a mechanism for monitoring and reporting greenhouse gas emissions and for reporting other information at national and Union level relevant to climate change and repealing Decision No 280/2004/EC (OJ L 165, 18.6.2013, p. 13).
Decision No 406/2009/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 April 2009 on the effort of Member States to reduce their greenhouse gas emissions to meet the Community's greenhouse gas emission reduction commitments up to 2020 (OJ L 140, 5.6.2009, p. 136).
Commission Regulation (EU) No 389/2013 of 2 May 2013 establishing a Union Registry pursuant to Directive 2003/87/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council, Decisions No 280/2004/EC and No 406/2009/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council and repealing Commission Regulations (EU) No 920/2010 and No 1193/2011 (OJ L 122, 3.5.2013, p. 1).
& /en 164 6. By way of derogation from Article 8 of this Agreement
(a) to the extent necessary to comply with paragraphs 2, 4 and 5 of this Article, the United Kingdom and operators in the United Kingdom shall have access to:
(i) the Union Registry and the United Kingdom's Kyoto Protocol Registry established by Regulation (EU) No 389/2013; and
(ii) the Central Data Repository of the European Environment Agency as provided for by Regulation (EU) No 1014/2010, Implementing Regulation (EU) No 293/2012 and Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) No 749/2014

Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) No 749/2014 of 30 June 2014 on structure, format, submission processes and review of information reported by Member States pursuant to Regulation (EU) No 525/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council (OJ L 203, 11.7.2014, p. 23).
& /en 165 (b) to the extent necessary to comply with paragraph 3 of this Article undertakings in the United Kingdom shall have access to:
(i) the reporting tool based on the format set out in the Annex to Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) No 1191/2014
for the purposes of managing and reporting on fluorinated greenhouse gases; and
(ii) the Business Data Repository used for reporting by undertakings under Article 27 of Regulation (EC) No 1005/2009.
Upon a request from the United Kingdom, for a period ending one year after the end of the transition period, the Union shall provide the necessary information for the United Kingdom to:
(a) comply with its reporting obligations under Article 7 of the Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer; and
(b) apply penalties in accordance with Article 25 of Regulation (EU) No 517/2014 and Article 29 of Regulation (EC) No 1005/2009.

Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) No 1191/2014 of 30 October 2014 determining the format and means for submitting the report referred to in Article 19 of Regulation (EU) No 517/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council on fluorinated greenhouse gases (OJ L 318, 5.11.2014, p. 5).
& /en 166 ARTICLE 97
Representation in ongoing proceedings  before the European Union Intellectual Property Office
Where, before the end of the transition period, a person who is authorised to represent a natural or legal person before the European Union Intellectual Property Office in accordance with Union law was representing a party in a procedure brought before that Office, that representative may continue to represent that party in that procedure. This right shall apply to all stages of the procedure before that Office.
When representing a party before the European Union Intellectual Property Office in the proceedings referred to in the first subparagraph, such representative shall in every respect be treated as a professional representative authorised to represent a natural or legal person before the European Union Intellectual Property Office in accordance with Union law.
& /en 167 TITLE XI
ADMINISTRATIVE COOPERATION PROCEDURES  BETWEEN MEMBER STATES AND THE UNITED KINGDOM
ARTICLE 98
Administrative cooperation for customs
1. Administrative cooperation procedures between a Member State and the United Kingdom set out in Annex VI that were launched in accordance with Union law before the end of the transition period shall be completed by that Member State and the United Kingdom in accordance with the relevant provisions of Union law.
2. Administrative cooperation procedures between a Member State and the United Kingdom set out in Annex VI that are launched within a period of 3 years after the end of the transition period but concern facts that occurred before the end of the transition period shall be completed by that Member State and the United Kingdom in accordance with the relevant provisions of Union law.
& /en 168 ARTICLE 99
Administrative cooperation for matters related to indirect tax
1. Council Regulation (EU) No 904/2010
shall apply until 4 years after the end of the transition period in respect of cooperation between the competent authorities responsible for the application of the legislation on VAT in the Member States and the United Kingdom in relation to transactions that took place before the end of the transition period and in relation to transactions covered by Article 51(1) of this Agreement.
2. Council Regulation (EU) No 389/2012
shall apply until 4 years after the end of the transition period in respect of cooperation between the competent authorities responsible for the application of the legislation on excise duties in the Member States and the United Kingdom in relation to movements of excise goods that took place before the end of the transition period and in relation to movements of excise goods covered by Article 52 of this Agreement.

Council Regulation (EU) No 904/2010 of 7 October 2010 on administrative cooperation and combating fraud in the field of value added tax (OJ L 268, 12.10.2010, p. 1).
Council Regulation (EU) No 389/2012 of 2 May 2012 on administrative cooperation in the field of excise duties and repealing Regulation (EC) No 2073/2004 (OJ L 121, 8.5.2012, p. 1).
& /en 169 3. By way of derogation from Article 8, the United Kingdom shall have access, to the extent strictly necessary to exercise its rights and comply with obligations under this Article, to the networks, information systems and databases listed in Annex IV. The United Kingdom shall reimburse the Union for the actual costs incurred by the Union as a consequence of facilitating that access. The Union shall communicate to the United Kingdom the amount of those costs by 31 March of each year until the end of the period referred to in Annex IV. In the event that the communicated amount of the actual costs incurred considerably diverge
from the best estimates amount that was communicated by the Union to the United Kingdom before the signature of this Agreement, the United Kingdom shall pay without delay to the Union the best estimates amount and the Joint Committee shall determine the manner in which the difference between the actual costs incurred and the best estimates amount is to be addressed.
& /en 170 ARTICLE 100
Mutual assistance for the recovery of claims relating  to taxes, duties and other measures
1. Council Directive 2010/24/EU
shall apply until 5 years after the end of the transition period between the Member States and the United Kingdom in respect of claims relating to amounts that became due before the end of the transition period, claims relating to transactions that took place before the end of the transition period but where the amounts became due after that period, and claims relating to transactions covered by Article 51(1) of this Agreement or movements of excise goods covered by Article 52 of this Agreement.
2. By way of derogation from Article 8, the United Kingdom shall have access, to the extent strictly necessary to exercise its rights and comply with obligations under this Article, to the networks, information systems and databases listed in Annex IV. The United Kingdom shall reimburse the Union for the actual costs incurred by the Union as a consequence of facilitating that access. The Union shall communicate to the United Kingdom the amount of those costs by 31 March of each year until the end of the period referred to in Annex IV. In the event that the communicated amount of the actual costs incurred considerably diverge
from the best estimates amount that was communicated by the Union to the United Kingdom before the signature of this Agreement, the United Kingdom shall pay without delay to the Union the best estimates amount and the Joint Committee shall determine the manner in which the difference between the actual costs incurred and the best estimates amount is to be addressed.

Council Directive 2010/24/EU of 16 March 2010 concerning mutual assistance for the recovery of claims relating to taxes, duties and other measures (OJ L 84, 31.3.2010, p. 1).
& /en 171 TITLE XII
PRIVILEGES AND IMMUNITIES
ARTICLE 101
Definitions
1. For the purposes of this Title, "members of the institutions" means, irrespective of their nationality, the President of the European Council, the members of the European Commission, the Judges, the Advocates-General, the Registrars and the Assistant Rapporteurs of the Court of Justice of the European Union, the members of the Court of Auditors, the members of the organs of the European Central Bank, the members of the organs of the European Investment Bank, as well as all other persons assimilated to any of those categories of persons under Union law for the purposes of Protocol (No 7) on the Privileges and Immunities of the European Union ("Protocol on the Privileges and Immunities"). The term "members of the institutions" does not include members of the European Parliament.
& /en 172 2. Regulation (EURATOM, ECSC, EEC) No 549/69 of the Council
shall apply to determine the categories of officials and other servants covered by Articles 110 to 113 of this Agreement.
CHAPTER
PROPERTY, FUNDS, ASSETS AND OPERATIONS OF THE UNION
ARTICLE 102
Inviolability
Article 1 of the Protocol on the Privileges and Immunities shall apply in respect of premises, buildings, property and assets of the Union in the United Kingdom used by the Union before the end of the transition period, until they are no longer in official use or have been removed from the United Kingdom. The Union shall notify the United Kingdom when its premises, buildings, property or assets are no longer in such use or have been removed from the United Kingdom.

Regulation (EURATOM, ECSC, EEC) No 549/69 of the Council of 25 March 1969 determining the categories of officials and other servants of the European Communities to whom the provisions of Article 12, the second paragraph of Article 13 and Article 14 of the Protocol on the Privileges and Immunities of the Communities apply (OJ L 74, 27.3.1969, p. 1).
& /en 173 ARTICLE 103
Archives
Article 2 of the Protocol on the Privileges and Immunities shall apply in respect of all archives of the Union in the United Kingdom at the end of the transition period, until they have been removed from the United Kingdom. The Union shall notify the United Kingdom of the removal of any of its archives from the United Kingdom.
ARTICLE 104
Taxation
Article 3 of the Protocol on the Privileges and Immunities shall apply in respect of the Union's assets, revenues and other property in the United Kingdom at the end of the transition period, until they are no longer in official use or have been removed from the United Kingdom.
& /en 174 CHAPTER 2
COMMUNICATIONS
ARTICLE 105
Communications
Article 5 of the Protocol on the Privileges and Immunities shall apply in the United Kingdom in respect of the official communications, official correspondence, and transmission of documents in relation to activities of the Union pursuant to this Agreement.
& /en 175 CHAPTER
MEMBERS OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT
ARTICLE 106
Immunity of members of the European Parliament
Article 8 of the Protocol on the Privileges and Immunities shall apply in the United Kingdom in respect of opinions expressed or votes cast before the end of the transition period by members of the European Parliament, including former members, irrespective of their nationality, in the performance of their duties.
& /en 176 ARTICLE 107
Social security
Former members of the European Parliament, irrespective of their nationality, who draw a pension in that capacity, as well as persons entitled to survivor's pensions as survivors of former members, irrespective of their nationality, shall be exempted from obligatory affiliation to and payment into national social security systems in the United Kingdom, under the same conditions as were applicable on the last day of the transition period, provided that the former members of the European Parliament were members of the European Parliament before the end of the transition period.
& /en 177 ARTICLE 108
Avoidance of double taxation on pensions and transitional allowances
Articles 12, 13 and 14 of Decision 2005/684/EC, Euratom of the European Parliament
shall apply in the United Kingdom in respect of pensions and transitional allowances paid to former members of the European Parliament, irrespective of their nationality, and Article 17 of that Decision shall apply in respect of persons entitled to survivor's pensions as survivors of former members, irrespective of their nationality, to the extent that the entitlement to a pension or transitional allowance was earned before the end of the transition period.

Decision 2005/684/EC, Euratom of the European Parliament of 28 September 2005 adopting the Statute for Members of the European Parliament (OJ L 262, 7.10.2005, p. 1).
& /en 178 CHAPTER
REPRESENTATIVES OF MEMBER STATES AND OF THE UNITED KINGDOM  TAKING PART IN THE WORK OF THE INSTITUTIONS OF THE UNION
ARTICLE 109
Privileges, immunities and facilities
1. Article 10 of the Protocol on the Privileges and Immunities shall apply in the United Kingdom in respect of representatives of Member States and of the United Kingdom who take part in the work of the institutions, bodies, offices and agencies of the Union, of their advisers and technical experts, and of members of the advisory bodies of the Union, irrespective of their nationality, as regards their participation in such work:
(a) that took place before the end of the transition period;
(b) that takes place after the end of the transition period in connection with activities of the Union pursuant to this Agreement.
& /en 179 2. Article 10 of the Protocol on the Privileges and Immunities shall apply in the Union in respect of representatives of the United Kingdom who take part in the work of the institutions, bodies, offices and agencies of the Union, and of their advisers and technical experts, as regards their participation in such work:
(a) that took place before the end of the transition period;
(b) that takes place after the end of the transition period in connection with activities of the Union pursuant to this Agreement.
& /en 180 CHAPTER 5
MEMBERS OF THE INSTITUTIONS, OFFICIALS AND OTHER SERVANTS
ARTICLE 110
Privileges and Immunities
1. Article 11(a) of the Protocol on the Privileges and Immunities shall apply in the United Kingdom in respect of acts performed, including in respect of their words spoken or written, by members of the institutions, officials and other servants of the Union, including former members, former officials and former other servants, of any nationality, in their official capacity:
(a) before the end of the transition period;
(b) after the end of the transition period in connection with activities of the Union pursuant to this Agreement.
& /en 181 2. The first, second and third paragraphs of Article 3 of Protocol (No 3) on the Statute of the Court of Justice of the European Union shall apply in the United Kingdom in respect of the Judges of the Court of Justice of the European Union and the Advocates-General until the decisions of the Court of Justice of the European Union in all proceedings and requests for preliminary rulings referred to in Articles 86 and 87 of this Agreement have become final, and shall apply thereafter, including in respect of former Judges and former Advocates-General, as regards all acts performed by them in their official capacity, including words spoken or written, before the end of the transition period or in relation to the proceedings referred to in Articles 86 and 87.
3. Article 11(b) to (e) of the Protocol on the Privileges and Immunities shall apply in the United Kingdom in respect of officials and other servants of the Union of any nationality, as well as in respect of their spouses and dependent members of their families, irrespective of their nationality, if those officials or other servants entered the service of the Union before the end of the transition period, until those persons have completed their relocation to the Union.
& /en 182 ARTICLE 111
Taxation
Article 12 of the Protocol on the Privileges and Immunities shall apply in the United Kingdom in respect of members of the institutions, officials and other servants of the Union of any nationality, including former members, former officials and former other servants, if those members, officials or other servants entered the service of the Union before the end of the transition period, provided that the persons concerned are liable to pay tax for the benefit of the Union on the salaries, wages, emoluments and pensions paid to them by the Union.
ARTICLE 112
Domicile for tax purposes
1. Article 13 of the Protocol on the Privileges and Immunities shall apply in respect of members of the institutions, officials and other servants of the Union of any nationality, who entered the service of the Union before the end of the transition period, as well as, irrespective of their nationality, in respect of spouses not separately engaged in a gainful occupation and children who are dependent on and in the care of such members, officials or other servants.
& /en 183 2. Paragraph 1 shall apply only in respect of persons who established their residence in a Member State solely by reason of the performance of their duties in the service of the Union and who had their domicile in the United Kingdom for tax purposes at the time of entering the service of the Union, and in respect of persons who established their residence in the United Kingdom solely by reason of the performance of their duties in the service of the Union and who had their domicile for tax purposes in a Member State at the time of entering the service of the Union.
ARTICLE 113
Social security contributions
Members of the institutions, officials and other servants of the Union of any nationality, including former members, former officials and former other servants, who entered the service of the Union before the end of the transition period and who reside in the United Kingdom, as well as, irrespective of their nationality, spouses not separately engaged in a gainful occupation and children who are dependent on and in the care of such members, officials or other servants, shall be exempted from obligatory affiliation to and payment into national social security systems in the United Kingdom, under the same conditions as were applicable on the last day of the transition period, provided that the persons concerned are affiliated to the social security scheme of the Union.
& /en 184 ARTICLE 114
Transfer of pension rights
In respect of officials and other servants of the Union of any nationality, including former officials and former other servants, who entered the service of the Union before the end of the transition period and who seek to transfer pension rights out of or into the United Kingdom pursuant to Article 11(1), (2) or (3) and Article 12 of Annex VIII to the Staff Regulations of Officials of the European Union
or Articles 39, 109 and 135 of the Conditions of Employment of Other Servants of the European Union, the obligations of the United Kingdom shall be the same as those existing before the end of the transition period.

Staff Regulations of Officials of the European Union as laid down in Council Regulation (EEC, Euratom, ECSC) No 259/68 of 29 February 1968 laying down the Staff Regulations and the Conditions of Employment of Other Servants of the European Communities and instituting special measures temporarily applicable to officials of the Commission (OJ
56, 4.3.1968, p. 1).
& /en 185 ARTICLE 115
Unemployment insurance
Articles 28a, 96, and 136 of the Conditions of Employment of Other Servants of the European Union shall apply in respect of other servants of the Union of any nationality, including former other servants, who contributed to the Union's unemployment scheme before the end of the transition period if they reside in the United Kingdom and are registered with the unemployment authorities of the United Kingdom after the end of the transition period.
CHAPTER
OTHER PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 116
Waiver of immunities and cooperation
1. Articles 17 and 18 of the Protocol on the Privileges and Immunities shall apply in respect of privileges, immunities and facilities accorded by this Title.
& /en 186 2. When taking a decision under Article 17 of the Protocol on the Privileges and Immunities on whether to waive immunity upon the request of the authorities of the United Kingdom, the Union shall afford the same consideration as it affords to requests from the authorities of the Member States in comparable situations.
3. Upon the request of the authorities of the United Kingdom, the Union shall notify those authorities of the status of any person which is relevant to that person's entitlement to a privilege or immunity under this Title.
ARTICLE 117
European Central Bank
1. This Title shall apply in respect of the European Central Bank ("ECB"), the members of its organs, its staff, and the representatives of the national central banks in the European System of Central Banks ("ESCB") who take part in the activities of the ECB
& /en 187 2. The second paragraph of Article 22 of the Protocol on the Privileges and Immunities shall apply in respect of the ECB, the members of its organs, its staff, the representatives of the national central banks in the ESCB who take part in the activities of the ECB, and any property, assets and operations of the ECB in the United Kingdom held, managed or conducted pursuant to Protocol (No 4) on the Statute of the European System of Central Banks and of the European Central Bank.
3. Paragraph 2 shall apply in respect of:
(a) such property and assets of the ECB that are held in the United Kingdom at the end of the transition period; and
(b) such operations of the ECB in the United Kingdom or with United Kingdom counterparts, and ancillary activities related thereto, that were ongoing at the end of the transition period, or that are initiated after the end of the transition period as part of its activities to sustain operations that were ongoing at the end of the transition period, until their final maturity, disposal or completion.
& /en 188 ARTICLE 118
European Investment Bank
1. This Title shall apply in respect of the European Investment Bank ("EIB"), the members of its organs, its staff and the representatives of the Member States who take part in its activities, as well as to any subsidiaries or any other entities established by the EIB before the end of the transition period in accordance with Article 28(1) of Protocol (No 5) on the Statute of the European Investment Bank, in particular the European Investment Fund.
2. The second paragraph of Article 21 of the Protocol on the Privileges and Immunities shall apply in respect of the EIB, the members of its organs, its staff and the representatives of the Member States who take part in its activities, as well as to any subsidiaries or any other entities established by the EIB before the end of the transition period in accordance with Article 28(1) of Protocol (No 5) on the Statute of the European Investment Bank, in particular the European Investment Fund.
3. Paragraph 2 shall apply in respect of:
(a) such property and assets of the EIB or of any subsidiaries and other entities established by the EIB before the end of the transition period in accordance with Article 28(1) of Protocol (No 5) on the Statute of the European Investment Bank, in particular the European Investment Fund, that are held in the United Kingdom at the end of the transition period; and
& /en 189 (b) such borrowing, financing, guarantee, investment, treasury and technical assistance operations of the EIB and of any subsidiaries and other entities established by the EIB before the end of the transition period in accordance with Article 28(1) of Protocol (No 5) on the Statute of the European Investment Bank, in particular the European Investment Fund, in the United Kingdom or with United Kingdom counterparts, and ancillary activities related thereto, that were ongoing at the end of the transition period or that are initiated after the end of the transition period, as part of their activities to sustain operations that were ongoing at the end of the transition period until their final maturity, disposure, or completion.
ARTICLE 119
Host agreements
The Headquarters Agreement between the United Kingdom and the European Banking Authority of
May 2012, the Exchange of Letters concerning the Application in the United Kingdom of the Protocol on the Privileges and Immunities of the European Communities to the European Agency for the Evaluation of Medicinal Products of 24 June 1996, and the Agreement on the Hosting of the Galileo Security Monitoring Centre of 17 July 2013 shall apply, respectively, to the European Banking Authority, the European Medicines Agency and the Galileo Security Monitoring Centre, until their relocation to a Member State is completed. The date of notification by the Union of the completion date of the relocation shall constitute the termination date of those host agreements.
& /en 190 TITLE XIII
OTHER ISSUES RELATING TO THE FUNCTIONING  OF THE INSTITUTIONS, BODIES, OFFICES AND AGENCIES OF THE UNION
ARTICLE 120
Obligation of professional secrecy
Article 339 TFEU and other provisions of Union law that impose an obligation of professional secrecy on certain individuals and institutions, bodies, offices and agencies of the Union shall apply in the United Kingdom in respect of any information of the kind covered by obligations of professional secrecy either obtained before the end of the transition period or obtained after the end of the transition period in connection with activities of the Union pursuant to this Agreement. The United Kingdom shall respect such obligations of individuals and institutions, bodies, offices and agencies and shall ensure that they are complied with in its territory.
& /en 191 ARTICLE 121
Obligation of professional discretion
Article 19 of the Staff Regulations of Officials of the European Union and other provisions of Union law that impose an obligation of professional discretion on certain individuals shall apply in the United Kingdom in respect of any information either obtained before the end of the transition period or obtained after the end of the transition period in connection with activities of the Union pursuant to this Agreement. The United Kingdom shall respect such obligations of individuals and shall ensure that they are complied with in its territory.
ARTICLE 122
Access to documents
1. For the purposes of the provisions of Union law on access to documents of the institutions, bodies, offices and agencies of the Union, all references to Member States and their authorities shall be understood as including the United Kingdom and its authorities in respect of documents drawn up by or obtained by the institutions, bodies, offices and agencies of the Union:
(a) before the end of the transition period; or
(b) after the end of the transition period in connection with activities of the Union pursuant to this Agreement.
& /en 192 2. Article 5 and Article 9(5) of Regulation (EC) No 1049/2001 of the European Parliament and of the Council
and Article 5 of Decision ECB/2004/3 of the European Central Bank
shall apply in the United Kingdom in respect of all documents falling within the scope of those provisions obtained by the United Kingdom:
(a) before the end of the transition period; or
(b) after the end of the transition period in connection with activities of the Union pursuant to this Agreement.

Regulation (EC) No 1049/2001 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 30 May 2001 regarding public access to European Parliament, Council and Commission documents (OJ L 145, 31.5.2001, p. 43).
Decision of the European Central Bank of 4 March 2004 on public access to European Central Bank documents (ECB/2004/3) (2004/258/EC) (OJ L 80, 18.3.2004, p. 42).
& /en 193 ARTICLE 123
European Central Bank
1. Articles 9.1, 17, 35.1, 35.2, and 35.4 of Protocol (No 4) on the Statute of the European System of Central Banks and of the European Central Bank, shall apply in respect of the ECB, the members of its organs, its staff, the representatives of the national central banks in the ESCB who take part in the activities of the ECB, and any property, assets and operations of the ECB in the United Kingdom held, managed or conducted pursuant to that Protocol. The ECB shall be exempt from requirements to register in the United Kingdom or to obtain any form of licence, permit or other authorisation or permission from the United Kingdom to carry out its operations.
2. Paragraph 1 shall apply in respect of:
(a) such property and assets of the ECB that are held in the United Kingdom at the end of the transition period; and
(b) such operations of the ECB in the United Kingdom or with United Kingdom counterparts, and ancillary activities related thereto, that were ongoing at the end of the transition period, or that are initiated after the end of the transition period as part of its activities to sustain operations that were ongoing at the end of the transition period, until their final maturity, disposal or completion.
& /en 194 ARTICLE 124
European Investment Bank
1. Article 13, Articles 20(2), 23(1), 23(4) and Article 26 and the first paragraph of Article 27 of Protocol (No 5) on the Statute of the European Investment Bank shall apply in respect of the EIB, the members of its organs, its staff and the representatives of the Member States who take part in its activities, as well as to any subsidiaries or any other entities established by the EIB before the end of the transition period in accordance with Article 28(1) of that Protocol, in particular the European Investment Fund. The EIB and the European Investment Fund shall be exempt from requirements to register in the United Kingdom or to obtain any form of licence, permit or other authorisation or permission from the United Kingdom to carry out their operations
The currency of the United Kingdom shall remain freely transferable and convertible, subject to Article 23(2) of Protocol (No 5) on the Statute of the European Investment Bank in respect of the convertibility of the currency of the United Kingdom into a currency of a non-Member State, for the purposes of such operations
2. Paragraph 1 shall apply in respect of:
(a) such property and assets of the EIB or of any subsidiaries and other entities established by the EIB before the end of the transition period in accordance with Article 28(1) of Protocol (No 5) on the Statute of the European Investment Bank, in particular the European Investment Fund, that are held in the United Kingdom at the end of the transition period; and
& /en 195 (b) such borrowing, financing, guarantee, investment, treasury and technical assistance operations of the EIB or of any subsidiaries and other entities established by the EIB before the end of the transition period in accordance with Article 28(1) of Protocol (No 5) on the Statute of the European Investment Bank, in particular the European Investment Fund, in the United Kingdom or with United Kingdom counterparts, and ancillary activities related thereto, that were ongoing at the end of the transition period or that are initiated after the end of the transition period, as part of their activities to sustain operations that were ongoing at the end of the transition period until their final maturity, disposure, or completion.
ARTICLE 125
European Schools
1. The United Kingdom shall be bound by the Convention defining the Statute of the European Schools1, as well as by the Regulations on Accredited European Schools adopted by the Board of Governors of the European Schools, until the end of the school year that is ongoing at the end of the transition period.
2. The United Kingdom shall, with respect to pupils who before 31 August 2021 acquired a European baccalaureate and to pupils who are enrolled in a cycle of secondary studies in a European School before 31 August 2021 and acquire a European baccalaureate after that date, ensure that such pupils enjoy the rights provided for in Article 5(2) of the Convention defining the Statute of the European Schools.

OJ L 212, 17.8.1994, p. 3.
& /en 196 PART FOUR
TRANSITION
ARTICLE 126
Transition period
There shall be a transition or implementation period, which shall start on the date of entry into force of this Agreement and end on 31 December 2020.
ARTICLE 127
Scope of the transition
1. Unless otherwise provided in this Agreement, Union law shall be applicable to and in the United Kingdom during the transition period.
& /en 197 However, the following provisions of the Treaties, and acts adopted by the institutions, bodies, offices or agencies of the Union, shall not be applicable to and in the United Kingdom during the transition period:
(a) provisions of the Treaties and acts which, pursuant to Protocol (No 15) on certain provisions relating to the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Protocol (No 19) on the Schengen acquis integrated into the framework of the European Union or Protocol (No 21) on the position of the United Kingdom and Ireland in respect of the area of freedom, security and justice, or pursuant to the provisions of the Treaties on enhanced cooperation, were not binding upon and in the United Kingdom before the date of entry into force of this Agreement as well as acts amending such acts;
(b) Article 11(4) TEU, point (b) of Article 20(2), Article 22 and the first paragraph of Article 24 TFEU, Articles 39 and 40 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union, and the acts adopted on the basis of those provisions.
2. In the event that the Union and the United Kingdom reach an agreement governing their future relationship in the areas of the Common Foreign and Security Policy and the Common Security and Defence Policy which becomes applicable during the transition period, Chapter 2 of Title V of the TEU and the acts adopted on the basis of those provisions shall cease to apply to the United Kingdom from the date of application of that agreement.
& /en 198 3. During the transition period, the Union law applicable pursuant to paragraph 1 shall produce in respect of and in the United Kingdom the same legal effects as those which it produces within the Union and its Member States, and shall be interpreted and applied in accordance with the same methods and general principles as those applicable within the Union.
4. The United Kingdom shall not participate in any enhanced cooperation:
(a) in relation to which authorisation was granted after the date of entry into force of this Agreement; or
(b) within the framework of which no acts were adopted before the date of entry into force of this Agreement.
5. During the transition period, in relation to measures which amend, build upon or replace an existing measure adopted pursuant to Title V of Part Three of the TFEU by which the United Kingdom is bound before the date of entry into force of this Agreement, Article 5 of Protocol (No 19) on the Schengen acquis integrated into the framework of the European Union and Article 4a of Protocol (No 21) on the position of the United Kingdom and Ireland in respect of the area of freedom, security and justice shall continue to apply mutatis mutandis. The United Kingdom shall not, however, have the right to notify its wish to take part in the application of new measures pursuant to Title V of Part Three of the TFEU other than those measures referred to in Article 4a of Protocol No 21.
& /en 199 In order to support continuing cooperation between the Union and the United Kingdom, under the conditions set out for cooperation with third countries in the relevant measures, the Union may invite the United Kingdom to cooperate in relation to new measures adopted under Title V of Part III TFEU.
6. Unless otherwise provided in this Agreement, during the transition period, any reference to Member States in the Union law applicable pursuant to paragraph 1, including as implemented and applied by Member States, shall be understood as including the United Kingdom.
7. By way of derogation from paragraph 6:
(a) for the purposes of Article 42(6) and Article 46 TEU and of Protocol (No 10) on permanent structured cooperation established by Article 42 TEU, any references to Member States shall be understood as not including the United Kingdom. This shall not preclude the possibility for the United Kingdom to be invited to participate as a third country in individual projects under the conditions set out in Council Decision (CFSP) 2017/2315
on an exceptional basis, or in any other form of cooperation to the extent allowed and under the conditions set out by future Union acts adopted on the basis of Article 42(6) and Article 46 TEU;

Council Decision (CFSP) 2017/2315 of 11 December 2017 establishing permanent structured cooperation (PESCO) and determining the list of participating Member States (OJ L 331, 14.12.2017, p. 57).
& /en 200 (b) where acts of the Union provide for the participation of Member States, nationals of Member States or natural or legal persons residing or established in a Member State in an information exchange, procedure or programme which continues to be implemented or which starts after the end of the transition period, and where such participation would grant access to security-related sensitive information that only Member States, nationals of Member States, or natural or legal persons residing or established in a Member State, are to have knowledge of, in such exceptional circumstances the references to Member States in such Union acts shall be understood as not including the United Kingdom. The Union shall notify the United Kingdom of the application of this derogation;
(c) for the purposes of the recruitment of officials and other servants of the institutions, bodies, offices or agencies of the Union, any references to Member States in Articles 27 and 28(a) of the Staff Regulations and in Article 1 of Annex X thereto and in Articles 12, 82 and 128 of the Conditions of Employment of Other Servants of the European Union, or in the relevant provisions of other staff rules applicable to those institutions, bodies, offices or agencies, shall be understood as not including the United Kingdom.
& /en 201 ARTICLE 128
Institutional arrangements
1. Notwithstanding Article 127, during the transition period Article 7 shall apply.
2. For the purposes of the Treaties, during the transition period, the parliament of the United Kingdom shall not be considered to be a national parliament of a Member State, except as regards Article 1 of Protocol (No 1) on the role of national parliaments in the European Union and, in respect of proposals which are in the public domain, Article 2 of that Protocol.
3. During the transition period, provisions of the Treaties which grant institutional rights to Member States enabling them to submit proposals, initiatives or requests to the institutions shall be understood as not including the United Kingdom
4. For the purposes of participation in the institutional arrangements laid down in Articles 282 and 283 TFEU and in Protocol (No 4) on the Statute of the European system of central banks and of the European Central Bank, with the exception of Article 21(2) of that Protocol, during the transition period, the Bank of England shall not be considered to be a national central bank of a Member State.

This should in particular concern Articles 7, 30, 42(4), 48(2)  (6) and 49 TEU and Articles 25, 76(b), 82(3), 83(3), 86(1), 87(3), 135, 218(8), 223(1), 262, 311 and 341 TFEU.
& /en 202 5. By way of derogation from paragraph 1 of this Article and from Article 7, during the transition period, representatives or experts of the United Kingdom, or experts designated by the United Kingdom, may, upon invitation, exceptionally attend meetings or parts of meetings of the committees referred to in Article 3(2) of Regulation (EU) No 182/2011, meetings or parts of meetings of Commission expert groups, meetings or parts of meetings of other similar entities, and meetings or parts of meetings of bodies, offices or agencies, where and when representatives or experts of the Member States or experts designated by Member States take part, provided that one of the following conditions is fulfilled:
(a) the discussion concerns individual acts to be addressed during the transition period to the United Kingdom or to natural or legal persons residing or established in the United Kingdom;
(b) the presence of the United Kingdom is necessary and in the interest of the Union, in particular for the effective implementation of Union law during the transition period.
During such meetings or parts of meetings, the representatives or experts of the United Kingdom or experts designated by the United Kingdom shall have no voting rights and their presence shall be limited to the specific agenda items that fulfil the conditions set out in point (a) or (b).
& /en 203 6. During the transition period, the United Kingdom shall not act as leading authority for risk assessments, examinations, approvals or authorisations at the level of the Union or at the level of Member States acting jointly as referred to in the acts and provisions listed in Annex VII.
7. During the transition period, where draft Union acts identify or refer directly to specific Member State authorities, procedures, or documents, the United Kingdom shall be consulted by the Union on such drafts, with a view to ensuring the proper implementation and application of those act
by and in the United Kingdom.
ARTICLE 129
Specific arrangements relating to the Union's external action
1. Without prejudice to Article 127(2), during the transition period, the United Kingdom shall be bound by the obligations stemming from the international agreements concluded by the Union, by Member States acting on its behalf, or by the Union and its Member States acting jointly, as referred to in point (a)(iv) of Article 2.

The Union will notify the other parties to these agreements that during the transition period the United Kingdom is to be treated as a Member State for the purposes of these agreements.
& /en 204 2. During the transition period, representatives of the United Kingdom shall not participate in the work of any bodies set up by international agreements concluded by the Union, or by Member States acting on its behalf, or by the Union and its Member States acting jointly, unless:
(a) the United Kingdom participates in its own right; or
(b) the Union exceptionally invites the United Kingdom to attend, as part of the Union's delegation, meetings or parts of meetings of such bodies, where the Union considers that the presence of the United Kingdom is necessary and in the interest of the Union, in particular for the effective implementation of those agreements during the transition period; such presence shall only be allowed where Member States participation is permitted under the applicable agreements.
3. In accordance with the principle of sincere cooperation, the United Kingdom shall refrain, during the transition period, from any action or initiative which is likely to be prejudicial to the Union's interests, in particular in the framework of any international organisation, agency, conference or forum of which the United Kingdom is a party in its own right.
4. Notwithstanding paragraph 3, during the transition period, the United Kingdom may negotiate, sign and ratify international agreements entered into in its own capacity in the areas of exclusive competence of the Union, provided those agreements do not enter into force or apply during the transition period, unless so authorised by the Union.
& /en 205 5. Without prejudice to Article 127(2), whenever there is a need for coordination, the United Kingdom may be consulted, on a case-by-case basis.
6. Following a decision of the Council falling under Chapter 2 of Title V TEU, the United Kingdom may make a formal declaration to the High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, indicating that, for vital and stated reasons of national policy, in those exceptional cases it will not apply the decision. In a spirit of mutual solidarity, the United Kingdom shall refrain from any action likely to conflict with or impede Union action based on that decision, and the Member States shall respect the position of the United Kingdom.
7. During the transition period, the United Kingdom shall not provide commanders of civilian operations, heads of mission, operation commanders or force commanders for missions or operations conducted under Articles 42, 43 and 44 TEU, nor shall it provide the operational headquarters for such missions or operations, or serve as framework nation for Union battlegroups. During the transition period, the United Kingdom shall not provide the head of any operational actions under Article 28 TEU.
& /en 206 ARTICLE 130
Specific arrangements relating to fishing opportunities
1. As regards the fixing of fishing opportunities within the meaning of Article 43(3) TFEU for any period falling within the transition period, the United Kingdom shall be consulted in respect of the fishing opportunities related to the United Kingdom, including in the context of the preparation of relevant international consultations and negotiations.
2. For the purposes of paragraph 1, the Union shall offer the opportunity to the United Kingdom to provide comments on the Annual Communication from the European Commission on fishing opportunities, the scientific advice from the relevant scientific bodies and the proposals from the European Commission for fishing opportunities for any period falling within the transition period.
3. Notwithstanding point (b) of Article 129(2), with a view to allowing the United Kingdom to prepare its future membership in relevant international fora, the Union may exceptionally invite the United Kingdom to attend, as part of the Union's delegation, international consultations and negotiations referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article, to the extent allowed for Member States and permitted by the specific forum.
& /en 207 4. Without prejudice to Article 127(1), the relative stability keys for the allocation of fishing opportunities referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article shall be maintained.
ARTICLE 131
Supervision and enforcement
During the transition period, the institutions, bodies, offices and agencies of the Union shall have the powers conferred upon them by Union law in relation to the United Kingdom and to natural and legal persons residing or established in the United Kingdom. In particular, the Court of Justice of the European Union shall have jurisdiction as provided for in the Treaties.
The first paragraph shall also apply during the transition period as regards the interpretation and application of this Agreement.
ARTICLE
32
Extension of the transition period
1. Notwithstanding Article 126, the Joint Committee may, before 1 July 2020, adopt a single decision extending the transition period up to
31 December 20XX
*

In case of extension, the Union will notify other parties to international agreements thereof.
& /en 208 2. In case of a decision of the Joint Committee under paragraph 1 the following shall apply:
(a) by derogation from Article 127(6), the United Kingdom shall be considered as a third country for the purposes of the implementation of the Union programmes and activities committed under the multiannual financial framework applying as from the year 2021;
(b) by derogation from Article 127(1) and without prejudice to Part Five of this Agreement, the applicable Union law concerning the Unions own resources relating to the financial years [2021
20XX] shall not apply to the United Kingdom after 31 December 2020;
(c) by derogation from Article 127 (1), Articles 107, 108 and 109 TFEU shall not apply to measures of the United Kingdom authorities, including on Rural Development, supporting the production of and trade in agricultural products in the United Kingdom up to an annual level of support which shall not be more than the total amount of expenditure incurred in the United Kingdom under the Common Agricultural Policy in 2019, and provided that a minimum percentage of that exempted support complies with the provisions of Annex 2 to the WTO Agreement on Agriculture. Such minimum percentage shall be determined on the basis of the last available percentage to which the overall expenditure under the Common Agricultural Policy in the Union complied with the provisions of Annex 2 to the WTO Agreement on Agriculture;
(d) for the period between 1 January 2021 and the end of the transition period, the United Kingdom shall
shall make a contribution to the Union budget, as determined in accordance with paragraph 3;
& /en 209 (e) subject to paragraph 3 (d), part Five of this Agreement shall not be affected
3. A decision of the Joint Committee under paragraph 1 shall:
(a) establish the appropriate amount of the contribution of the United Kingdom to the Union budget for the period between 1 January 2021 and the end of the transition period, taking into account the status of the United Kingdom during that period, as well as the modalities of payment of that amount;
(b) specify the maximum annual level of exempted support, as well as the minimum percentage of it that shall comply with the provisions of  Annex 2 to the WTO Agreement on Agriculture, as referred to in point (c) of paragraph 2;
(c) lay down any other measure necessary for the implementation of paragraph 2
(d) adapt the dates or periods referred to in Articles 51, 62, 63, 84, 96, 125, 141, 156, 157 and Annexes IV and V to reflect the extension of the transition period.
& /en 210 PART FIVE
FINANCIAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER
GENERAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 133
Currency to be used between the Union and the United Kingdom
Without prejudice to the applicable Union law concerning the Union's own resources, all amounts, liabilities, calculations, accounts and payments referred to in this Part shall be drawn up and implemented in euro.
& /en 211 ARTICLE 134
Facility offered to auditors in relation to the financial provisions
The United Kingdom shall inform the Union about the entities it has entrusted to carry out its audit of the implementation of the financial provisions covered by this Part.
On the United Kingdom's request, the Union shall provide those entrusted entities with any information that may reasonably be requested as regards the United Kingdom's rights and obligations under this Part and shall provide them with adequate assistance to allow them to accomplish their task. In providing information and assistance under this Article, the Union shall act in accordance with applicable Union law, in particular with Union rules on data protection.
The authorities of the United Kingdom and of the Union may agree on appropriate administrative arrangements to facilitate the application of the first and second paragraphs

& /en 212 CHAPTER
THE UNITED KINGDOM'S CONTRIBUTION TO  AND PARTICIPATION IN THE UNION BUDGET
ARTICLE 135
The United Kingdom's contribution to and participation  in the implementation of the Union budgets for the years 2019 and 2020
1. For the years 2019 and 2020, in accordance with Part Four, the United Kingdom shall contribute to and participate in the implementation of the Union budgets.
2. By way of derogation from Part Four, amendments to Council Regulation (EU, Euratom) 1311/2013
or Decision 2014/335/EU, Euratom that are adopted on or after the date of entry into force of this Agreement shall not apply to the United Kingdom in so far as those amendments have an impact on the United Kingdom's financial obligations.

Council Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 1311/2013 of 2 December 2013 laying down the multiannual financial framework for the years 2014-2020 (OJ L 347, 20.12.2013, p. 884).
& /en 213 ARTICLE 136
Provisions applicable after 31 December 2020 in relation to own resources
1. The applicable Union law concerning the Union's own resources relating to financial years until 2020 shall continue to apply to the United Kingdom after 31 December 2020, including where the own resources concerned are to be made available, corrected or subject to adjustments after that date.
2. Without prejudice to Article 135(2), the Union law referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article shall include in particular the following acts and provisions, including any amendment thereto, irrespective of the date of adoption, entry into force or application of the amendment:
(a) Decision 2014/335/EU, Euratom;
(b) Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 609/2014, and in particular Article 12 thereof in relation to the interest on amounts made available belatedly and Article 11 thereof in relation to the handling of the opt-out;
(c) Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 608/2014 and in particular Article 1 thereof in relation to the calculation of the balance and Articles 2 to 8 thereof in relation to the implementing measures for the system of own resources;
& /en 214 (d) Council Regulation (EEC, Euratom) No 1553/89
(e) Council Regulation (EC, Euratom) No 1287/2003
(f) Commission Implementing Decision (EU, Euratom) 2018/195
(g) Commission Implementing Decision (EU, Euratom) 2018/194

Council Regulation (EEC, Euratom) No 1553/89 of 29 May 1989 on the definitive uniform arrangements for the collection of own resources accruing from value added tax (OJ L 155, 7.6.1989, p. 9).
Council Regulation (EC, Euratom) No 1287/2003 of 15 July 2003 on the harmonisation of gross national income at market prices (GNI Regulation) (OJ L 181, 19.7.2003, p. 1).
Commission Implementing Decision (EU, Euratom) 2018/195 of 8 February 2018 establishing forms for reporting on fraud and irregularities affecting entitlements to traditional own resources and on inspections relating to traditional own resources pursuant to Council Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 608/2014 (OJ L 36, 9.2.2018, p. 33).
Commission Implementing Decision (EU, Euratom) 2018/194 of 8 February 2018 establishing models for statements of accounts for entitlements to own resources and a form for reports on irrecoverable amounts corresponding to the entitlements to own resources pursuant to Council Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 609/2014 (OJ L 36, 9.2.2018, p. 20).
& /en 215 (h) Regulation (EU, Euratom) 2018/1046 of the European Parliament and of the Council
(the "Financial Regulation");
(i) Article 287 TFEU on the role of the Court of Auditors as well as other rules concerning that institution;
(j) Article 325 TFEU on combatting fraud and related acts, in particular Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 883/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council
and Council Regulation (EC, Euratom) No 2988/95
(k) the annual budgets for the financial years until 2020 or, in the event that the annual budget has not been adopted, the rules applicable in accordance with Article 315 TFEU.

Regulation (EU, Euratom) 2018/1046 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 July 2018 on the financial rules applicable to the general budget of the Union, amending Regulations (EU) No 1296/2013, (EU) No 1301/2013, (EU) No 1303/2013, (EU) No 1304/2013, (EU) No 1309/2013, (EU) No 1316/2013, (EU) No 223/2014, (EU) No 283/2014, and Decision No 541/2014/EU and repealing Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 966/2012 (OJ
193, 30.7.2018, p. 1).
Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 883/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 September 2013 concerning investigations conducted by the European Anti-Fraud Office (OLAF) and repealing Regulation (EC) No 1073/1999 of the European Parliament and of the Council and Council Regulation (Euratom) No 1074/1999 (OJ L 248, 18.9.2013, p. 1).
Council Regulation (EC, Euratom) No 2988/95 of 18 December 1995 on the protection of the European Communities financial interests (OJ L 312, 23.12.1995, p. 1).
& /en 216 3. By way of derogation from paragraphs 1 and 2, the following rules shall apply to the United Kingdom after 31 December 2020:
(a) any amounts resulting, in respect of the United Kingdom, from adjustments to own resources entered into the budget and from adjustments related to the surplus or deficit, in relation to the financing of the Union budgets until 2020 in accordance with the Union law referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2, shall be due by or to the United Kingdom;
(b) if, in accordance with the applicable Union law concerning the Union's own resources, the date on which the own resources are to be made available is after 28 February 2021, the payment shall be made on the earliest date referred to in Article 148(1) following the date on which the own resources are to be made available;
(c) for the purpose of payment by the United Kingdom of traditional own resources after 28 February 2021, the amount of entitlements established in accordance with Article 2 of Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 609/2014 after the reduction of the collection costs in accordance with Articles 2(3) and 10(3) of Decision 2014/335/EU, Euratom shall be reduced by the United Kingdom's share of this amount;
& /en 217 (d) by way of derogation from Article 7 of this Agreement, the representatives or experts of the United Kingdom, or experts designated by the United Kingdom may, upon invitation, exceptionally attend, without voting rights, the meetings of any committee established by the applicable Union law referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article, such as the meetings of the Advisory Committee on Own Resources established by Article 7 of Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 608/2014 or the GNI Committee established by Article 4 of Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 1287/2003, to the extent that the work of such committees concerns the financial years until 2020;
(e) any correction or adjustment to the own resources based on VAT and gross national income shall only be made if the relevant measures pursuant to the provisions referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 are decided upon no later than 31 December 2028;
(f) the separate account for traditional own resources referred to in the second subparagraph of Article 6(3) of Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 609/2014 shall be fully liquidated by 31 December 2025. Prior to 20 February 2026, a share of the amounts still in that account on 31 December 2025 and not being subject to European Commission inspection findings communicated prior to that date under the own resources legislation shall be made available to the Union budget corresponding to the share of the amounts made available to the Union on the amounts reported by the United Kingdom to the European Commission in the framework of the procedure laid down in Article 13 of Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 609/2014 during the period between 1 January 2014 and 31 December 2020.
& /en 218 ARTICLE 137
The United Kingdom's participation in the implementation  of the Union programmes and activities in 2019 and 2020
1. In accordance with Part Four, the Union programmes and activities committed under the multiannual financial framework for the years 2014-2020 ("MFF 2014-2020") or previous financial perspectives shall be implemented in 2019 and 2020 with regard to the United Kingdom on the basis of the applicable Union law.
Regulation (EU) No 1307/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council
as applicable in the year 2020 shall not apply in the United Kingdom for claim year 2020. However, Article 13 of that Regulation shall apply in respect of the United Kingdom direct payments scheme for claim year 2020, provided that such scheme is equivalent to the scheme of Regulation (EU) 1307/2013, as applicable in the year 2020.

Regulation (EU) No 1307/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 17 December 2013 establishing rules for direct payments to farmers under support schemes within the framework of the common agricultural policy and repealing Council Regulation (EC) No 637/2008 and Council Regulation (EC) No 73/2009 (OJ L 347, 20.12.2013, p. 608).
& /en 219 2. By way of derogation from Part Four, the United Kingdom and projects located in the United Kingdom shall only be eligible for financial operations carried out within financial instruments managed directly or indirectly under Title X of the Financial Regulation or financial operations guaranteed by the Union budget under the European Fund for Strategic Investments (EFSI) established by Regulation (EU) 2015/1017 of the European Parliament and of the Council
and the European Fund for Sustainable Development (EFSD) established by Regulation (EU) 2017/1601 of the European Parliament and of the Council2, provided that those financial operations were approved by the entities and bodies, including the EIB and the European Investment Fund ("EIF"), or by persons entrusted with the implementation of part of those actions before the date of entry into force of this Agreement, even if the signature of those financial operations took place after that date. In relation to those financial operations approved after the date of entry into force of this Agreement, entities established in the United Kingdom shall be treated as entities located outside the Union.

Regulation (EU) 2015/1017 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 June 2015 on the European Fund for Strategic Investments, the European Investment Advisory Hub and the European Investment Project Portal and amending Regulations (EU) No 1291/2013 and (EU) No 1316/2013  the European Fund for Strategic Investments (OJ L 169, 1.7.2015, p. 1).
Regulation (EU) 2017/1601 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 September 2017 establishing the European Fund for Sustainable Development (EFSD), the EFSD Guarantee and the EFSD Guarantee Fund (OJ L 249, 27.9.2017, p. 1).
& /en 220 ARTICLE 138
Union law applicable after 31 December 2020  in relation to the United Kingdom's participation  in the implementation of the Union programmes and activities  committed under the MFF 2014-2020 or previous financial perspectives
1. In respect of the implementation of the Union programmes and activities committed under the MFF 2014-2020 or previous financial perspectives, applicable Union law, including the rules on financial corrections and on clearance of accounts, shall continue to apply to the United Kingdom after 31 December 2020 until the closure of those Union programmes and activities.
2. The applicable Union law referred to in paragraph 1 shall include in particular the following provisions, including any amendments to those provisions, irrespective of the date of adoption, entry into force or application of the amendment:
(a) the Financial Regulation;
(b) the basic acts, within the meaning of point (4) of Article 2 of the Financial Regulation, establishing Union programmes or activities referred to in the budget remarks concerning titles, chapters, articles or items under which the appropriations have been committed;
& /en 221 (c) Article 299 TFEU on the enforceability of pecuniary obligations;
(d) Article 287 TFEU on the role of the Court of Auditors as well as other rules concerning that institution;
(e) Article 325 TFEU on combatting fraud and related acts, in particular Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 883/2013 and Regulation (EC, Euratom) No 2988/95.
3. By way of derogation from Article 7, the representatives or experts of the United Kingdom, or experts designated by the United Kingdom, may, upon invitation, exceptionally attend, without voting rights, meetings of the committees that assist the European Commission in the implementation and management of the programmes established by Union law referred to in paragraph 1 or established by the European Commission in respect of the implementation of that law, to the extent that their work concerns the financial years until 2020.
4. By way of derogation from Article 8, the United Kingdom shall have access, to the extent strictly necessary for the implementation of the programmes and activities referred to in point (b) of paragraph 2, to the networks, information systems and the databases established under the relevant basic acts or by the related implementation rules derived from those basic acts.
& /en 222 5. On a proposal from the Committee on the financial provisions referred to in point (f) of Article 165(1), the Joint Committee may adopt, in conformity with the rules established in Article 166, technical measures to facilitate the closure of the programmes and activities referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article or to exempt the United Kingdom from obligations to take actions, during or after the closure of those programmes and activities, which are not relevant for a former Member State, provided that such technical measures respect the principle of sound financial management and do not result in an advantage in favour of the United Kingdom or the United Kingdom beneficiaries compared to Member States or third countries participating in the same programmes and activities financed by the Union budget.
ARTICLE 139
Share of the United Kingdom
The United Kingdom's share referred to in points (a) and (c) of Article 136(3), and in Articles 140 to 147 shall be a percentage calculated as the ratio between the own resources made available by the United Kingdom in the years 2014 to 2020 and the own resources made available during that period by all Member States and the United Kingdom as adjusted by the amount communicated to the Member States before 1 February 2022 in accordance with Article 10b(5) of Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 609/2014.
& /en 223 ARTICLE 140
Outstanding commitments
1. Unless otherwise provided for in this Agreement, the United Kingdom shall be liable to the Union for the United Kingdom's share of the budgetary commitments of the Union budget and the budgets of the Union decentralised agencies outstanding on 31 December 2020 and for the United Kingdom's share of the commitments made in 2021 on the carryover of commitment appropriations from the budget for 2020.
The first subparagraph shall not apply to the following commitments outstanding on 31 December 2020:
(a) those commitments related to the programmes and bodies to which Article 11 of Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 609/2014 applies with regard to the United Kingdom;
(b) those commitments financed by assigned revenue in the Union budget.
With regard to the Union's decentralised agencies, the amount of their commitments referred to in the first subparagraph shall only be taken into account in proportion to the share of contributions from the Union budget in their overall revenues for the period 2014-2020.
& /en 224 2. The Union shall calculate the amount of commitments referred to in paragraph 1 on 31 December 2020. It shall communicate that amount to the United Kingdom by 31 March 2021, adding a list with the reference key of each commitment, the associated budget lines, and the amount for each associated budget line.
3. The Union shall, by 31 March of each year, starting in 2022, with regard to the commitments referred to in paragraph 1, communicate to the United Kingdom:
(a) information on the amount of commitments outstanding on 31 December of the previous year and on the payments and decommitments made in the previous year, including an update of the list referred to in paragraph 2;
(b) an estimate of the expected payments in the current year based on the level of payment appropriations in the budget;
(c) an estimate of the expected contribution of the United Kingdom to the payments referred to in point (b); and
(d) other information, such as a medium term payment forecast.
& /en 225 4. The annual amount payable shall be calculated as the United Kingdom's share of the estimate referred to in point (b) of paragraph 3 adjusted by the difference between the payments made by the United Kingdom in the previous year and the United Kingdom's share of the payments made by the Union in the previous year on the outstanding commitments referred to in paragraph 1, reduced by the amount of net financial corrections in relation to programmes and activities financed under the MFF 2014-2020 or previous financial perspectives and reduced by the proceeds of any infringement procedures concerning the failure of a Member State to make available own resources related to financial years until 2020, provided that those amounts have been received by the budget in the previous year and are definitive. The annual amount payable by the United Kingdom shall not be adjusted in the given year.
In 2021, the annual amount payable by the United Kingdom shall be reduced by the United Kingdom's share in the financing of the budget for 2020 of the amount of payment appropriations carried over from 2020 to 2021 in accordance with Articles 12 and 13 of the Financial Regulation and by the United Kingdom's share of the total amount of traditional own resources made available to the Union in January and February
021 in respect of which the Union's entitlements were established in accordance with Article 2 of Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 609/2014 in November and December 2020. The Union shall also reimburse to the United Kingdom the United Kingdom's share of the total amount of traditional own resources made available by the Member States after 31 December 2020 for goods released for free circulation in respect of ending or discharge of temporary storage or customs procedures referred to in Article 49(2) started before or on this date.
& /en 226 5. At the request of the United Kingdom, made at the earliest after 31 December 2028, the Union shall make an estimate of the remaining amounts to be paid by the United Kingdom under this Article, on the basis of a rule taking into account the amount of outstanding commitments at the end of the year and an estimate of any decommitments on those outstanding commitments, any financial corrections and any proceeds from the infringement procedures after the end of the year. After the confirmation by the United Kingdom of the acceptance of the proposal to the Committee on the financial provisions referred to in point (f) of Article 165(1) and the Joint Committee, the United Kingdom shall pay the estimated amount, as adjusted in accordance with paragraph 4 of this Article, in relation to the payments made by the United Kingdom in the previous year. The payment of the amounts referred to in this paragraph shall extinguish the remaining obligations of the United Kingdom or the Union under this Article.
ARTICLE 141
Fines decided upon before or on 31 December 2020
1. In respect of a fine decided upon by the Union before or on 31 December 2020 that has become definitive and that does not constitute assigned revenue, the Union shall reimburse the United Kingdom for its share of the amount of the fine collected by the Union, unless that amount has already been recorded as budget revenue in the Union budget before or on 31 December 2020.
2. In respect of a fine decided upon by the Union after 31 December 2020 in a procedure referred to in Article 92(1), the Union shall reimburse the United Kingdom for its share of the amount of the fine collected by the Union once that fine has become definitive.
& /en 227 ARTICLE 142
Union liabilities at the end of 2020
1. The United Kingdom shall be liable to the Union for its share of the financing of the Union's liabilities incurred until 31 December 2020, with the exception of the following:
(a) liabilities with corresponding assets, including: Union financial assistance loan assets and the associated balance sheet liabilities, assets corresponding to property, plant and equipment and provisions related to the Joint Research Centre's nuclear sites dismantlement, and all lease-related obligations, intangible assets and inventories, any assets and liabilities relating to the management of foreign currency risk, accrued and deferred income and all provisions other than in respect of fines, legal proceedings and financial guarantee liabilities; and
(b) liabilities and assets which are related to the operation of the budget and the management of own resources, including outstanding pre-financing advances, receivables, cash, payables, and accrued charges, including those related to the European Agricultural Guarantee Fund or already included in the outstanding commitments (RAL).
2. In particular, the United Kingdom shall be liable for its share of the Union's liability for pension rights and rights to other employment-related benefits accrued on or before 31 December 2020. Payments related to this liability shall be made in accordance with paragraphs 5 and 6.
& /en 228 3. The Union shall communicate to the United Kingdom by 31 March of each year, starting in 2022, the payments made during the previous year corresponding to the liabilities outstanding at 31 December 2020 and the amount of the contribution of the United Kingdom to those payments.
4. By 31 March of each year, starting in 2022, the Union shall communicate to the United Kingdom a specific document on pensions relating to the situation at 31 December of the preceding year in respect of the liability referred to in paragraph 2, which shall provide:
(a) the remaining amounts still to be paid in relation to the liabilities described in paragraph 5;
(b) the calculations made and the data and assumptions used to determine the amount that the United Kingdom is to pay, by 30 June of the current year, in relation to staff pension payments and the Union budget contributions to the Joint Sickness Insurance Scheme (JSIS) made in the preceding year in accordance with paragraph 6 and an estimate of those amounts for the current year;
(c) concerning the population at 31 December 2020, information on the numbers of actual beneficiaries and estimated future beneficiaries of the staff pension and sickness insurance schemes at the end of the previous year and their accumulated post-employment rights at that time; and
& /en 229 (d) the outstanding United Kingdom liabilities calculated using actuarial valuations made in accordance with the relevant International Public Sector Accounting Standards and an explanation of the evolution of this liability compared to the previous year.
That document may be updated by 30 September of the same year to reflect the definitive figures for the preceding year.
5
With respect to the United Kingdom's liability for the pension rights and rights to other employment-related benefits referred to in paragraph 2 as regards pensions of the Members and EU high-level public office holders covered by Council Regulation 422/67/EEC, 5/67/Euratom1, Decision 2005/684/EC, Euratom of the European Parliament
and Council Regulation (EU) 2016/3003, the United Kingdom shall contribute to the liabilities as they are recorded in the consolidated accounts of the Union for the financial year 2020 in 10 instalments starting on 31 October 2021.

Regulation No 422/67/EEC, 5/67/Euratom of the Council of 25 July 1967 determining the emoluments of the President and members of the Commission and of the President, Judges, Advocates-General and Registrar of the Court of Justice (OJ P 187, 8.8.1967, p. 1).
Decision 2005/684/EC, Euratom of the European Parliament of 28 September 2005 adopting the Statute for Members of the European Parliament (OJ L 262, 7.10.2005, p. 1).
Council Regulation (EU) 2016/300 of 29 February 2016 determining the emoluments of EU high-level public office holders (OJ L 58, 4.3.2016, p. 1).
& /en 230 6. With respect to the United Kingdom's liability for the pension rights and rights to other employment-related benefits referred to in paragraph 2 as regards pensions of officials of the Union established in accordance with Articles 77 to 84 of the Staff Regulations of Officials of the European Union and as regards the pensions of temporary staff, contract staff and parliamentary assistants established in accordance with Articles 33 to 40, Articles 101 to 114 and Article 135, respectively, of the Conditions of Employment of Other Servants of the European Union, the United Kingdom shall contribute annually to the net payments made from the Union budget to each beneficiary and to the related contribution of the Union budget to the JSIS for each beneficiary or person who benefits through a beneficiary. The payments of that contribution shall start on 30 June 2022.
For the pensions referred to in the first subparagraph, the payment by the United Kingdom shall be the sum of the net payments made by the Union budget in the preceding year for each beneficiary, multiplied by the United Kingdom's share and by a percentage that is specific to each beneficiary ("specific percentage"). The specific percentage shall be as follows:
(a) for a beneficiary receiving pension on 1 January 2021, the specific percentage shall be 100 %;
(b) for any other beneficiary of a pension, the specific percentage shall be calculated as the ratio between the pension rights acquired in accordance with the Staff Regulations of Officials of the European Union and in particular in Annex VIII thereto on or before 31 December 2020, including pension rights transferred in at that date, and the acquired pension rights at the date of retirement or death if earlier, or at the date the person leaves the scheme;
& /en 231 (c) for the purposes of the contribution of the budget to the JSIS, the specific percentage shall be calculated as the ratio between the number of years during which the beneficiary contributed to the pension scheme until 31 December 2020 and the total number of years at retirement during which the beneficiary, or the person covered by the Staff Regulations of Officials of the European Union who is the basis for the rights under the JSIS, contributed to the pension scheme.
For a beneficiary of a survivor's pension or an orphan's pension established in accordance with the Staff Regulations of Officials of the European Union, the calculation shall be made on the basis of the career of the person covered by those Staff Regulations which is the basis for the survivor's pension or the orphan's pension.
As long as the liability in relation to this paragraph is not extinguished, in any given year ("year N") the United Kingdom may send the Union before 1 March of year N a request to pay the outstanding liability at 31 December of year N. The Union shall establish the amount of the outstanding liability in relation to the pension and JSIS post-employment benefits, using the same methodology as used in point (d) of paragraph 4. If the United Kingdom agrees, it shall pay that amount in five instalments, with the first payment taking place in the year N+1. The United Kingdom shall also cover its liability for the year N through the procedure set out in this paragraph. After that payment has been completed, and provided that the payments referred to in paragraph 5 have been completed, the remaining obligations under this Article shall be extinguished. The Committee on the financial provisions referred to in point (f) of Article 165(1) and the Joint Committee shall be informed of this situation.
& /en 232 ARTICLE 143
Contingent financial liabilities related to loans  for financial assistance, EFSI, EFSD and the external lending mandate.
1. The United Kingdom shall be liable to the Union for its share of the contingent financial liabilities of the Union arising from financial operations that were:
(a) decided upon by the European Parliament and the Council or by the European Commission before the date of entry in force of this Agreement, where such financial operations relate to loans for financial assistance decided in accordance with Council Regulation (EU) No 407/20101, Council Regulation (EC) No 332/20022, or the decisions of the European Parliament and the Council providing macro-financial assistance to various countries on the basis of a provisioning in accordance with Council Regulation (EC, Euratom) No 480/2009
or Council Regulation (EC, Euratom) 2728/94

Council Regulation (EU) No 407/2010 of 11 May 2010 establishing a European financial stabilisation mechanism (OJ L 118, 12.5.2010, p. 1).
Council Regulation (EC) No 332/2002 of 18 February 2002 establishing a facility providing medium-term financial assistance for Member States' balances of payments (OJ L 53, 23.2.2002, p. 1).
Council Regulation (EC, Euratom) No 480/2009 of 25 May 2009 establishing a Guarantee Fund for external actions (OJ L 145, 10.6.2009, p. 10).
Council Regulation (EC, Euratom) No 2728/94 of 31 October 1994 establishing a Guarantee Fund for external actions (OJ L 293, 12.11.1994, p. 1).
& /en 233 (b) approved before the date of entry into force of this Agreement by the bodies, entities or persons that are directly entrusted with the implementation of financial operations in relation to budgetary guarantees that either were given in favour of the EIB through the EFSI in accordance with Regulation (EU) 2015/1017 or through the external lending mandate in accordance with Regulation (EC, Euratom) No 480/2009 or Regulation (EC, Euratom) No 2728/94 and Decision No 466/2014/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council
or Decision No 1080/2011/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council2, or were given in favour of eligible counterparts (EFSD).
On 31 July 2019, the Union shall provide the United Kingdom with a specific report concerning those financial operations, providing, for each type of instrument, information on:
(a) the financial liabilities arising from those financial operations on the date of entry into force of this Agreement;

Decision No 466/2014/EU of the European Parliament and the Council of 16 April 2014 granting an EU guarantee to the European Investment Bank against losses under financing operations supporting investment projects outside the Union (OJ L 135, 8.5.2014, p. 1).
Decision No 1080/2011/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 October 2011 granting an EU guarantee to the European Investment Bank against losses under loans and loan guarantees for projects outside the Union and repealing Decision No 633/2009/EC (OJ L 280, 27.10.2011, p. 1).
& /en 234 (b) where applicable, the provisions held on the date of entry into force of this Agreement in the respective guarantee funds or fiduciary accounts to cover the financial liabilities referred to in point (a) and the respective provisions committed and not yet paid.
In the consolidated accounts of the Union relating to the years 2019 and 2020, the payments made out of the provisions referred to in point (b) of the second subparagraph from the date of entry into force of this Agreement until 31 December 2019 and 2020, respectively, shall be disclosed for the same financial operations as referred to in this paragraph but which are decided upon on or after the date of entry into force of this Agreement.
The liability of the United Kingdom to the Union in relation to the financial operations referred to in this paragraph shall not be affected by any restructuring of those financial operations. In particular, the financial exposure of the United Kingdom shall not increase, in nominal terms, in comparison with the situation immediately prior to the restructuring.
2. For the financial operations referred to in paragraph 1, the Union shall be liable to the United Kingdom for its share of:
(a) any amounts recovered by the Union from defaulting debtors or related to undue payments; and
& /en 235 (b) any net revenue resulting from the difference between financial and operational revenues and financial and operational expenses, entered as revenue, general or assigned, in the Union budget.
For revenue of the asset management of the provisioning of instruments having a provisioning, the Union shall calculate a percentage of revenue as the ratio between the net revenue of the asset management of the previous year and the total provisioning existing at the end of the previous year. The amount of the liability toward the United Kingdom for revenue of the asset management of the provisioning shall be the amount obtained by multiplying the United Kingdom's current provisioning as referred to in paragraph 5 by that percentage of revenue.
3. By 31 March 2021, for each instrument referred to in paragraph 1 that provides for provisioning from the Union's budget, the Union shall communicate to the United Kingdom:
(a) its initial provisioning, calculated as the United Kingdom's share of the sum of:
(i) the provisions made in the corresponding guarantee fund by 31 December 2020;
(ii) the amount of provisions committed and not yet paid by 31 December 2020; and
& /en 236 (iii) the payments made from the date of entry into force of this Agreement until 31 December 2020 related to financial operations decided upon on or after the date of entry into force of this Agreement; and
(b) its default provisioning rate, calculated as the ratio between the United Kingdom's initial provisioning for that instrument and the amount of the financial operations referred to in paragraph 1 as at 31 December
020 decided upon before the date of entry into force of this Agreement.
4. On 31 March of each year, starting in 2021, until the amortisation, expiry or termination of the financial operations referred to in paragraph 1, the Union shall communicate to the United Kingdom information concerning those financial operations. The information shall contain, for each type of instrument:
(a) the contingent liabilities outstanding at 31 December of the preceding year;
(b) the payments made in the preceding year by the Union in relation to those financial operations and the amounts of such payments that have accumulated after 31 December 2020;
(c) the United Kingdom's current provisioning and its current provisioning rate as set out in paragraph 5;
& /en 237 (d) the reimbursements made to the United Kingdom in the preceding year in accordance with point (a) of paragraph 6 and the amounts of such reimbursements that have accumulated after 31 December 2020;
(e) the amounts recovered and the net revenues entered in the Union budget as referred to in paragraph 2 for the preceding year;
(f) if necessary, other useful information concerning the financial operations in the preceding year.
5. By 31 March of each year, for each instrument referred to in paragraph 1, where the basic act establishes provisioning from the Union budget, the Union shall:
(a) calculate the United Kingdom's current provisioning, defined as the amount of the United Kingdom's initial provisioning reduced by:
(i) the United Kingdom's share of the accumulated payments referred to in point (b) of paragraph 4 made from the Union budget after 31 December 2020 in relation to financial operations decided upon before the date of entry into force of this Agreement;
& /en 238 (ii) the United Kingdom's share of the amount of decommitments made in the previous years on the outstanding commitments referred to in point (a)(ii) of paragraph 3 of this Article, as communicated pursuant to Article 140(3);
(iii) the accumulated level of reimbursements made to the United Kingdom as of
January 2021, as referred to in point (d) of paragraph 4;
(b) communicate to the United Kingdom the current provisioning rate defined as the ratio between the United Kingdom's current provisioning and the amount of financial operations referred to in point (a) of paragraph 4.
6. Every year from 2022 onwards:
(a) if the United Kingdom's current provisioning rate for an instrument exceeds its default provisioning rate for that instrument, the Union shall be liable to the United Kingdom for that instrument for the amount obtained by multiplying the amount of the financial liabilities referred to in point (a) of paragraph 4 by the difference between the current provisioning rate and the default provisioning rate. The Union's liability shall not exceed the United Kingdom's current provisioning as calculated in paragraph 5;
& /en 239 (b) if, in a given year, the United Kingdom's current provisioning rate for an instrument becomes negative, the United Kingdom shall be liable to the Union for that instrument for the amount of the negative current provisioning. In the following years, the United Kingdom shall be liable to the Union for that instrument for its share of the payments made as communicated in accordance with point (b) of paragraph 4 of this Article and the United Kingdom's share of the amount of decommitments made in the previous year on the outstanding commitments referred to in point (a)(ii) of paragraph 3 of this Article, as communicated pursuant to Article 140(3).
7. If the United Kingdom's current provisioning is positive once the Union's financial operations related to an instrument referred to in paragraph 1 are extinguished, the Union shall be liable to the United Kingdom for the amount of the United Kingdom's current provisioning as calculated in accordance with paragraph 5.
8. After 31 December 2020, if payments are made from the Union budget for the financial operations referred to in paragraph 1 in relation to an instrument for which the basic act does not establish provisioning, the United Kingdom shall be liable to the Union for that instrument for its share of the payments made as communicated in accordance with point (b) of paragraph 4.
& /en 240 9. For the purposes of this Article, where financial liabilities, payments, recoveries or other amounts relate to financial operations referred to in paragraph 1 but it cannot be directly determined whether they arise from a particular financial operation as a result of the application of risk mutualisation or subordination mechanisms, the relevant financial liabilities, payments, recoveries or other amounts that are required to be determined for the application of this Article shall be calculated on a pro-rata basis based on the ratio between the amount of financial operations decided upon or approved before the date of entry into force of this Agreement on 31 December of the year before the calculation is made and the total amount of financial operations on the latter date.
10. Where financial operations as referred to in paragraph 1 are non-amortising, such financial operations shall be considered after 10 years as amortising in proportion to the amortisation of the remaining amortising operations.
& /en 241 ARTICLE 144
Financial instruments under direct or indirect implementation  financed by the programmes of the MFF 2014-2020  or under earlier financial perspectives
1. From the date of entry into force of this Agreement until the full amortisation of the financial operations referred to in point (a) of this subparagraph, the Union shall identify the financial operations that:
(a) before the date of entry into force of this Agreement, have been decided upon by the European Commission and, where necessary, approved by the financial institutions which have been entrusted by the European Commission with the implementation of a financial instrument under a programme of the MFF 2014-2020 or under earlier financial perspectives under direct or indirect implementation; and
(b) have been decided upon and, where necessary, approved on or after the date of entry into force of this Agreement.
& /en 242 On 31 July 2019, in the report referred to in the second subparagraph of Article 143(1), the Union shall provide the following information concerning the financial instruments, under direct or indirect implementation, financed by the programmes of the MFF 2014-2020 or financed under earlier financial perspectives:
(a) the financial liabilities arising from the operations decided upon before the date of entry into force of this Agreement by the European Commission or the entity entrusted by the European Commission with the implementation of the financial instrument; and
(b) the payments made by the European Commission for the financial instruments and the amounts committed for the financial instruments that have not yet been paid at that date.
The liability of the Union to the United Kingdom in relation to the financial operations referred to in this paragraph shall not be affected by a restructuring of those financial operations, to the extent that such restructuring does not increase the financial exposure to the counterparty, in nominal terms, as it stood immediately prior to the restructuring.
& /en 243 2. On 31 March of each year, starting in 2021, until their amortisation, expiry or termination, for each financial instrument referred to in paragraph 1, the Union shall communicate to the United Kingdom the available information regarding the financial operations referred to in paragraph 1 that have been decided upon or approved before the date of entry into force of this Agreement and those that have been decided upon or approved on or after that date. For each instrument, the information shall contain:
(a) the financial liabilities as at 31 December of the preceding year arising from the financial operations decided upon by the European Commission, or approved by the entity entrusted by the European Commission with the implementation of the financial instrument, before the date of entry into force of this Agreement;
(b) the total financial liabilities as at 31 December of the preceding year arising from the financial operations decided upon by the European Commission, or by the entity entrusted by the European Commission with the implementation of the instrument;
(c) the ratio between the amounts referred to in points (a) and (b);
(d)
he payments made from the provisioning fund or from fiduciary accounts with the entrusted entities, where such payments relate to financial operations that were decided upon by the European Commission or were approved by the entity entrusted by the European Commission with the implementation of the financial instrument, after the date of entry into force of this Agreement;
& /en 244 (e) the part of the amounts paid back to the Union in accordance with Article 209(3) of the Financial Regulation, other than the returns provided for in point (f) of this paragraph, related to financial operations decided upon or approved before the date of entry into force of this Agreement;
(f) returns on resources of the financial instrument in the provisioning fund or in fiduciary accounts;
(g) the part of the amount of the provisioning fund or fiduciary accounts which has not been disbursed and which has been recovered by the European Commission;
(h) if necessary, other useful information concerning the financial operations in the preceding year.
3. The Union shall be liable to the United Kingdom for the United Kingdom's share of any amount referred in points (d) to (g) of paragraph 2.
4. For the purposes of this Article, where financial liabilities, payments, recoveries or other amounts relate to financial operations referred to in paragraph 1 but cannot be directly determined to arise from a particular financial operation as a result of the application of risk mutualisation or subordination mechanisms, the relevant financial liabilities, payments, recoveries or other amounts required to be determined for the application of this Article shall be calculated on a pro-rata basis, based on the ratio referred to in point (c) of paragraph 2.
& /en 245 ARTICLE 145
The European Coal and Steel Community
The Union shall be liable to the United Kingdom for its share of the net assets of the European Coal and Steel Community in liquidation on 31 December 2020.
The Union shall reimburse the United Kingdom for the relevant amount in five equal annual instalments on 30 June of each year, starting on 30 June 2021.
ARTICLE 146
Union investment in the EIF
The Union shall be liable to the United Kingdom for its share of the Union's investment in the paid-in capital of the EIF on 31 December 2020.
The Union shall reimburse the United Kingdom for the relevant amount in five equal annual instalments on 30 June of each year starting on 30 June 2021.
& /en 246 ARTICLE 147
Contingent liabilities related to legal cases
1. The United Kingdom shall be liable for its share of the payments required to discharge the contingent liabilities of the Union that become due in relation to legal cases concerning financial interests of the Union related to the budget and, in particular, in relation to Regulation (EC, Euratom) No 2988/95 or in relation to legal cases resulting from the execution of Union programmes and policies, provided that the facts forming the subject matter of those cases occurred no later than 31 December 2020.
The Union shall be liable to the United Kingdom for its share of any amount of subsequent recoveries related to the payments referred to in the first subparagraph.
2. The Union shall communicate to the United Kingdom the amounts referred to in paragraph 1 by 31 March of each year.
& /en 247 ARTICLE 148
Payments after 2020
1. The reference dates for payments by the United Kingdom to the Union or by the Union to the United Kingdom made after 31 December 2020 shall be 30 June and 31 October of every year for the amounts:
(a) referred to in Article 49(2), Articles 50 and 53, Article 62(2), point (e) of Article 63(1), and Articles 63(2), 99(3), and 100(2);
(b) referred to in Article 84(1);
(c) referred to in points (a), (b), (c), (e) and (f) of Article 136(3), by the next reference date following the date of adjustment or correction;
(d) resulting from corrective measures to be taken by the United Kingdom with regard to own resources due for financial years until 2020 as a result of controls executed under Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 608/2014 or Regulation (EEC, Euratom) No 1553/89 or for any other reason, by the next reference date following the date of the corrective measure;
(e) referred to in Article 140(4), in two instalments on the reference dates for payments, the first instalment amounting to half of the second one;
& /en 248 (f) referred to in Article 140(5), on 30 June following the confirmation by the United Kingdom of the acceptance of the proposal of the Union to the Committee on the financial provisions referred to in point (f) of Article 165(1) and the Joint Committee;
(g) referred to in Article 141, by the next reference date following the adjustment of the own resources for the Member States resulting from the definitive entry of the fine into the Union budget;
(h) referred to in Article 142(1), by the next reference date following the date of the communication referred to in paragraph 3;
(i) referred to in Article 142(5) and the fourth subparagraph of Article 142(6), on 31 October of each year;
(j) referred to in the first subparagraph of Article 142(6), on 30 June of each year;
(k) referred to in Articles 143 and 144, by the next reference date following the date of the communication referred in Articles 143(4) and 144(2);
(l) referred to in Articles 145 and 146;
& /en 249 (m) referred to in Article 147(2), by the next reference date following the date of the communication referred to therein;
(n) referred to in paragraph 3 as possible accrued interest.
Payments shall be made in four equal monthly instalments for payments that have a reference date of 30 June and in eight equal monthly instalments for payments that have a reference date of 31 October. All payments shall be made by the last working day of each month, starting on the reference date or, where the reference date is not a working day, the last working day before the reference date.
2. As long as there are still payments to be made by the Union to the United Kingdom or by the United Kingdom to the Union, the Union shall communicate to the United Kingdom on 16 April and on 16 September of each year a document specifying the relevant amounts to be paid, expressed in euro and in British pounds, based on the conversion rate applied by the European Central Bank on the first working day of the month. The Union or the United Kingdom shall pay the net amounts by the dates referred to in paragraph 1.
3. Any delay in payments by the United Kingdom to the Union or by the Union to the United Kingdom shall be subject to the payment of interest in accordance with Article 12 of Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 609/2014.
& /en 250 CHAPTER
EUROPEAN CENTRAL BANK
ARTICLE 149
Reimbursement of the paid-in capital
The European Central Bank shall, on behalf of the Union, reimburse the Bank of England for the paid-in capital provided by the Bank of England. The date of the reimbursement and other practical arrangements shall be established in accordance with Protocol (No 4) on the Statute of the European System of Central Banks and of the European Central Bank.
& /en 251 CHAPTER
EUROPEAN INVESTMENT BANK
ARTICLE 150
Continued liability of the United Kingdom and reimbursement of the paid-in capital
1. The United Kingdom shall remain liable, as set out in this Article, for the financial operations approved by the EIB before the date of entry into force of this Agreement, as further specified in paragraph 2 ("EIB financial operations"), even if the resulting financial exposure is assumed on or after the date of entry into force of this Agreement, and shall remain liable for other risks assumed by the EIB as set out in the second subparagraph.
The liability of the United Kingdom shall extend to the EIB financial operations and to asset-liability management risks and operational risks attributable to the EIB financial operations, in accordance with paragraph 6. For other such risks that are not associated with specific financial operations and are not attributable to the stock of financial operations built after the date of entry into force of this Agreement, the amount of the liability of the United Kingdom shall be proportional to the ratio between the remaining exposure due to EIB financial operations and the total amount of financial operations at the time the liability of the United Kingdom is triggered in accordance with paragraph 6.
& /en 252 The implementation of any post-withdrawal growth strategy of the EIB is not covered by the scope of this Article.
2. The EIB financial operations shall include loans, guarantees, fund investments, equity investments, bonds and other loan substitute products, and any other financing operations, with counterparties or regarding projects inside and outside the territory of the Member States, including operations guaranteed by third parties including the Member States or the Union.
The liability of the United Kingdom for EIB financial operations shall apply where the financial exposure of the EIB:
(a) is based on an approval by the Board of Directors of the EIB given prior to the date of entry into force of this Agreement, or based on a decision adopted on the basis of a delegation by the Board of Directors given prior to the date of entry into force of this Agreement;
(b) results from the restructuring of an EIB financial operation, to the extent that such restructuring does not increase the financial exposure to the counterparty, in nominal terms, as it stood immediately prior to the restructuring;
(c) results from a change to an EIB financial operation , where that change was approved by the Board of Directors of the EIB on or after the date of entry into force of this Agreement, to the extent that such change does not increase the financial exposure to the counterparty as it stood immediately prior to the change; or
& /en 253 (d) results from the institutional participation of the EIB in the capital of the EIF and the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, as it stood immediately prior to the date of entry into force of this Agreement.
For the purposes of establishing the limits on the liability of the United Kingdom pursuant to paragraphs 3 and 5, the exposure of the EIB on account of EIB financial operations which, due to their nature, are not subject to amortisation, in particular equity-type investments, revolving mandates granted to the EIF, and the participation in the capital of the EIF and the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, shall be considered to amortise as follows: for a period of 10 years from the entry into force of this Agreement, the amount of the non-amortising exposure under the EIB financial operation shall be considered to remain at the amount as approved by the EIB prior to the entry into force of this Agreement, reduced by any disposal made by the EIB since this date. After this period, the amount shall be treated as decreasing in proportion to the amortisation of the remaining amortising exposure on account of EIB financial operations.
3. For the purposes of paragraph 1, the United Kingdom shall be liable for its share of the uncalled subscribed capital of the EIB as it stood immediately prior to the date of entry into force of this Agreement. The United Kingdom shall make payments to the EIB, up to the amount of its liability pursuant to this paragraph, when its liability is triggered in accordance with paragraph 6.
That total liability pursuant to this paragraph shall at no point exceed the amount of the United Kingdom's share of the uncalled subscribed capital of the EIB as it stood immediately prior to the date of entry into force of this Agreement.
& /en 254 When the amount of the remaining exposure of the EIB under the EIB financial operations referred to in paragraph 1 is lower than the total amount of subscribed capital of the EIB as it stood immediately prior to the date of entry into force of this Agreement, the amount of the liability of the United Kingdom pursuant to this paragraph shall, at any given time, be limited to the amount obtained by applying the ratio of the United Kingdom subscribed capital of the EIB and the total subscribed capital of the EIB as they stood immediately prior to the date of entry into force of this Agreement ("the United Kingdom share of the subscribed capital") to the difference between the amount of that remaining exposure at that time, and the total paid-in subscribed capital of the EIB as it stood immediately prior to the date of entry into force of this Agreement.
4. The EIB shall pay to the United Kingdom on behalf of the Union an amount equal to the United Kingdom's share of the paid-in subscribed capital of the EIB as it stood immediately prior to the date of entry into force of this Agreement. That payment shall be made in accordance with Protocol No 5 on the Statute of the European Investment Bank. It shall be made in 12 yearly instalments. The first 11 instalments, each equal to EUR 300 000 000, shall be due on 15 December of each year starting in 2019. The balance of EUR 195 903 950 shall be due on 15 December 2030. The payments made in accordance with this paragraph shall not release the United Kingdom from its liability under paragraph 5.
& /en 255 5. In addition to its liability under paragraph 3, for the purposes of paragraph 1, the United Kingdom shall be liable for its paid-in subscribed capital of the EIB as it stood immediately prior to the date of entry into force of this Agreement. The United Kingdom shall make payments to the EIB, up to the amount of its liability, in accordance with this paragraph, when its liability is triggered under paragraph 6.
The total liability pursuant to this paragraph shall at no point exceed the amount of the paid-in subscribed capital of the United Kingdom in the EIB as it stood immediately prior to the date of entry into force of this Agreement.
When the remaining exposure of the EIB on account of the EIB financial operations referred to in paragraph 1 is lower than the total paid-in subscribed capital of the EIB as it stood immediately prior to the date of entry into force of this Agreement, the amount of the liability of the United Kingdom pursuant to this paragraph shall, at any time, be limited to an amount obtained by applying the ratio of the United Kingdom share of the subscribed capital to the amount of that remaining exposure at that time.
6. The liability of the United Kingdom in accordance with this Article shall be triggered, on a pari-passu basis with respect to the Member States, in the event that the EIB requires the Member States to make payments on account of their uncalled subscribed capital or when the paid-in subscribed capital of the Member States is used.
& /en 256 When the liability of the United Kingdom pursuant to paragraph 3 is triggered, the United Kingdom shall pay the amount due to the EIB under the same conditions as apply to the Member States (including the timing and the terms of the payment), as decided by the Board of Directors of the EIB at the relevant time. The decision of the EIB requiring the Member States to make payments on account of their uncalled subscribed capital may, in particular, be related to the nature of underlying risk events and the financial position of the EIB in the light of its payment obligations, the state of its assets and liabilities, its standing in capital markets, and the provisions of its contingency and recovery planning as applicable at the relevant time.
When the liability of the United Kingdom pursuant to paragraph 5 is triggered, the United Kingdom shall pay the amount due to the EIB, in euro, within 30 days from the first demand from the EIB, and subject to the fourth subparagraph of this paragraph.
The liability of the United Kingdom triggered in accordance with paragraph 5 shall be fulfilled from the United Kingdom's share of paid-in subscribed capital of the EIB as it stood immediately prior to the date of entry into force of this Agreement up to the amount not yet paid to the United Kingdom in accordance with paragraph 4. The amount of annual instalments referred to in paragraph 4 shall be reduced accordingly. If the liability of the United Kingdom cannot be fully met in accordance with this method, the United Kingdom shall pay to the EIB the remaining amount due.
& /en 257 The EIB shall, on behalf of the Union, in each case establish the attribution of the events underlying the triggering of the liability of the United Kingdom to the relevant stock of financial operations or risks and the amount which the United Kingdom is obliged to pay to the EIB as follows:
(a) to the extent that underlying events are attributable to EIB financial operations, or are attributable to associated asset-liability management risk or operational risk, the United Kingdom shall pay to the EIB an amount equal to the United Kingdom share of the subscribed capital of the total sum which the Member States are required to pay, or an amount equal to the United Kingdom share of the subscribed capital of the total sum by which the paid-in subscribed capital of the Member States is used, respectively;
(b) to the extent that underlying events are attributable to other risks, and are not attributable to any specific financial operation or to the stock of financial operations built after the date of entry into force of this Agreement, the United Kingdom shall pay to the EIB the amount resulting from point (a) multiplied by the ratio of the remaining exposure due to EIB financial operations to the total amount of financial operations at the time the liability of the United Kingdom is triggered.
7. Except for the payments provided for in paragraph 4, the EIB shall not be obliged to make any other payment, return or remuneration on account of the termination of the membership of the United Kingdom of the EIB or on account of the retention by the United Kingdom of a liability in accordance with this Article.
& /en 258 8. On 31 July 2019, the EIB shall communicate to the United Kingdom the United Kingdom's exposure under the EIB financial operations, and the limit on the liability of the United Kingdom in accordance with paragraphs 3 and 5, reflecting the financial situation of the EIB and the liability of the United Kingdom as of the date of entry into force of this Agreement.
On 31 March of every year, starting in 2020, until the extinction of the liability of the United Kingdom in accordance with this Article, the EIB shall communicate to the United Kingdom the remaining exposure of the United Kingdom under the EIB financial operations, and the limit on the liability of the United Kingdom in accordance with paragraphs 3 and 5, reflecting the financial situation of the EIB and the liability of the United Kingdom as at 31 December of the preceding year. The report shall also disclose any material changes which, in the opinion of the EIB, have a material impact on the liability of the United Kingdom. The EIB shall also provide timely information if such changes occur during the year.
The EIB shall provide the United Kingdom with timely information regarding any upcoming triggering of the liability of the United Kingdom pursuant to this Article, in line with the information provided to the Member States. That information shall include information on the nature of the triggering event and the calculation of the amounts to be paid. The United Kingdom shall treat that information as strictly confidential until the EIB lifts the confidentiality or until the liability of the United Kingdom is triggered, whichever occurs first.
& /en 259 ARTICLE 151
Participation of the United Kingdom in EIB group after the withdrawal date
As from the date of entry into force of this Agreement, neither the United Kingdom nor projects located in the United Kingdom shall be eligible for new financial operations from the EIB group that are reserved for Member States, including those under Union mandates. Entities established in the United Kingdom shall be treated as entities located outside the Union.
The signature of financial operations relating to the United Kingdom, to United Kingdom entities, or to United Kingdom projects approved by the EIB group before the date of entry into force of this Agreement, may take place after that date on the same basis as that on which they were originally approved.
CHAPTER
EUROPEAN DEVELOPMENT FUND  AND THE UNITED KINGDOM'S GUARANTEE  UNDER THE EDF INTERNAL AGREEMENTS
& /en 260 ARTICLE 152
Participation in the European Development Fund
1. The United Kingdom shall remain party to the European Development Fund ("EDF") until the closure of the 11th EDF and all previous unclosed EDFs, and shall in this respect assume the same obligations as the Member States under the Internal Agreement by which it was set up ("the 11th EDF Internal Agreement
1, and shall assume the obligations resulting from previous EDFs until their closure, including any such obligations under Council Regulations (EU) 2015/322
and (EU) 2015/3233, subject to the conditions laid down in this Agreement. The United Kingdom shall be bound by the decisions of the Council setting out the annual contributions of Member States as adopted under Article 21 of Regulation (EU) 2015/323. United Kingdom beneficiaries shall remain eligible to participate in projects under the 11th EDF and previous EDFs under the same conditions as before the date of entry into force of this Agreement.

Internal Agreement between the Representatives of the Governments of the Member States of the European Union, meeting within the Council, on the financing of European Union aid under the multiannual financial framework for the period 2014 to 2020, in accordance with the ACP-EU Partnership Agreement, and on the allocation of financial assistance for the Overseas Countries and Territories to which Part Four of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union applies (OJ L 210, 6.8.2013, p. 1).
Council Regulation (EU) 2015/322 of 2 March 2015 on the implementation of the 11th European Development Fund (OJ L 58, 3.3.2015, p. 1).
Council Regulation (EU) 2015/323 of 2 March 2015 on the financial regulation applicable to the 11th European Development Fund (OJ L 58, 3.3.2015, p. 17).
& /en 261 2. By way of derogation from Article 7 of this Agreement, the United Kingdom may participate, as an observer without voting rights, in the EDF Committee as established in accordance with Article 8 of the 11th EDF Internal Agreement and in the Investment Facility Committee as established in accordance with Article 9 of the 11th EDF Internal Agreement.
3. The overseas countries and territories referred to in point (e) of Article 3(1) shall benefit from the 11th EDF until its closure and from previous EDFs until their closure.
4. The United Kingdom's share of the Investment Facility of the EDF from successive EDF periods shall be reimbursed to the United Kingdom as the investment matures. The method for making this reimbursement shall be the same as the method set out in Article 144. Unless agreed otherwise, the United Kingdom's capital share shall not be recommitted beyond the end of the 11th EDF commitment period or rolled over into subsequent periods.
& /en 262 ARTICLE 153
Reuse of the decommitments
Where the amounts from projects under the 10th EDF or the amounts from previous EDFs have not been committed in accordance with Article 1(3) of the 11th EDF Internal Agreement, or have been decommitted in accordance with to Article 1(4) of the 11th EDF Internal Agreement on the date of entry into force of this Agreement, the United Kingdom's share of those amounts shall not be reused.
The first paragraph shall apply to the United Kingdom's share of funds not committed or decommitted under the 11th EDF after 31 December 2020.
& /en 263 ARTICLE 154
The United Kingdom's guarantee under the successive EDF Internal Agreements
The United Kingdom shall remain liable in respect of its guarantees under Article 9 of the 4th EDF Internal Agreement1, Article 8 of the 5th2, 6th3, 7th
and 8th EDF Internal Agreement5, Article 6 of the 9th EDF Internal Agreement
and Article 4 of the 10th
and 11th EDF Internal Agreement.
The United Kingdom shall remain entitled to its share of any amounts recovered under the terms of the Member States' guarantees and to the balance of its Member State Call Account. The United Kingdom's share referred to in this subparagraph shall be in proportion to its respective participation in each guarantee agreement.

OJ L 25, 30.1.1976, p. 168.
OJ L 347, 22.12.1980, p. 210.
OJ L 86, 31.3.1986, p. 210.
OJ L 229, 17.8.1991, p. 288.
OJ L 156, 29.5.1998, p. 108.
OJ L 317, 15.12.2000, p. 355.
OJ L 247, 9.9.2006, p. 32.
& /en 264 CHAPTER
TRUST FUNDS AND FACILITY FOR REFUGEES IN TURKEY
ARTICLE 155
Commitments toward the Trust Funds and the Facility for Refugees in Turkey
1. The United Kingdom shall honour the commitments it made before the date of entry into force of this Agreement to the European Union Emergency Trust Fund for stability and addressing root causes of irregular migration and displaced persons in Africa, established by Commission Decision of 20 October 20151, to any future European Union Trust Fund created before the date of entry into force of this Agreement, and to the Facility for Refugees in Turkey, established by Commission decision of 24 November 2015
and any amendments thereto adopted before the date of entry into force of this Agreement.

Commission Decision of 20 October 2015 on the establishment of a European Union Emergency Trust Fund for stability and addressing root causes of irregular migration and displaced persons in Africa (C(2015) 7293).
Commission Decision of 24 November 2015 on the coordination of the actions of the Union and of the Member States through a coordination mechanism  the Refugee Facility for Turkey (OJ C 407, 8.12.2015, p. 8).
& /en 265 2. The United Kingdom may participate in the relevant bodies related to the Facility for Refugees in Turkey, following the rules established for donors in accordance with Article 234(4) of the Financial Regulation.
CHAPTER
AGENCIES OF THE COUNCIL AND COMMON SECURITY  AND DEFENCE POLICY OPERATIONS
& /en 266 ARTICLE 156
The United Kingdom's obligations from the date of entry into force of this Agreement
Until 31 December 2020, the United Kingdom shall contribute to the financing of the European Defence Agency, the European Union Institute for Security Studies, and the European Union Satellite Centre, as well as to the costs of Common Security and Defence Policy operations, on the basis of the contribution keys set out in point (a) of Article 14(9) of Council Decision (EU) 2016/13531, in Article 10(3) of Council Decision 2014/75/CFSP2, in Article 10(3) of Council Decision 2014/401/CFSP
and in the second subparagraph of Article 41(2) of the Treaty on European Union, respectively, and in accordance with Article 5 of this Agreement.

Council Decision (EU) 2016/1353 of 4 August 2016 concerning the financial rules of the European Defence Agency and repealing Decision 2007/643/CFSP, (OJ L 219, 12.8.2016, p. 98).
Council Decision 2014/75/CFSP of 10 February 2014 on the European Union Institute for Security Studies, (OJ L 41, 12.2.2014, p. 13).
Council Decision 2014/401/CFSP of 26 June 2014 on the European Union Satellite Centre and repealing Joint Action 2001/555/CFSP on the establishment of a European Union Satellite Centre, (OJ L 188, 27.6.2014, p. 73).
& /en 267 ARTICLE 157
The United Kingdom's obligations after 31 December 2020
1
Based on the accounts of the agencies, to the extent that the relevant liabilities have not been provisioned on 31 December 2020, the United Kingdom shall pay its share of the following liabilities in accordance with its contribution key for each of those agencies on the basis of their audited accounts on 31 December 2020:
(a) the pension liabilities for the personnel of the European Defence Agency, the European Union Institute for Security Studies, and the European Union Satellite Centre;
(b) any liabilities arising from the liquidation of the Western European Union.
2. The payment in relation to the liabilities referred to in paragraph 1 shall be made by 30 June 2021.
& /en 268 PART SIX
INSTITUTIONAL AND FINAL PROVISIONS
TITLE I
CONSISTENT INTERPRETATION AND APPLICATION
ARTICLE 158
References to the Court of Justice of the European Union concerning Part Two
1. Where, in a case which commenced at first instance within 8 years from the end of the transition period before a court or tribunal in the United Kingdom, a question is raised concerning the interpretation of Part Two of this Agreement, and where that court or tribunal considers that a decision on that question is necessary to enable it to give judgment in that case, that court or tribunal may request the Court of Justice of the European Union to give a preliminary ruling on that question.
& /en 269 However, where the subject matter of the case before the court or tribunal in the United Kingdom is a decision on an application made pursuant to Article 18(1) or (4) or pursuant to Article 19, a request for a preliminary ruling may be made only where the case commenced at first instance within a period of 8 years from the date from which Article 19 applies.
2. The Court of Justice of the European Union shall have jurisdiction to give preliminary rulings on requests pursuant to paragraph 1. The legal effects in the United Kingdom of such preliminary rulings shall be the same as the legal effects of preliminary rulings given pursuant to Article 267 TFEU in the Union and its Member States.
3. In the event that the Joint Committee adopt
a decision under Article 132(1), the period of eight years referred to in the second subparagraph of paragraph 1 shall be automatically extended by the corresponding number of months by which the transition period is extended

& /en 270 ARTICLE 159
Monitoring of the implementation and application of Part Two
1. In the United Kingdom, the implementation and application of Part Two shall be monitored by an independent authority (the "Authority") which shall have powers equivalent to those of the European Commission acting under the Treaties to conduct inquiries on its own initiative concerning alleged breaches of Part Two by the administrative authorities of the United Kingdom and to receive complaints from Union citizens and their family members for the purposes of conducting such inquiries. The Authority shall also have the right, following such complaints, to bring a legal action before a competent court or tribunal in the United Kingdom in an appropriate judicial procedure with a view to seeking an adequate remedy.
2. The European Commission and the Authority shall each annually inform the specialised Committee on citizens
rights referred to in point (a) of Article 165(1) on the implementation and application of Part Two in the Union and in the United Kingdom, respectively. The information provided shall, in particular, cover measures taken to implement or comply with Part Two and the number and nature of complaints received.
3.
he Joint Committee shall assess, no earlier than 8 years after the end of the transition period, the functioning of the Authority. Following such assessment, it may decide, in good faith, pursuant to point (f) of Article 164(4) and Article 166, that the United Kingdom may abolish the Authority.
& /en 271 ARTICLE 160
Jurisdiction of the Court of Justice of the European Union  concerning certain provisions of Part Five
Without prejudice to Article 87 of this Agreement, Articles 258, 260, and 267 TFEU shall apply in respect of the interpretation and application of applicable Union law referred to in Article 136 and Article 138(1) or (2) of this Agreement. To this effect, any reference made in Articles 258, 260, and 267 TFEU to a Member State shall be understood as including the United Kingdom.
ARTICLE 161
Procedures before the Court of Justice of the European Union
1. Where a court or tribunal of a Member State refers a question concerning the interpretation of this Agreement to the Court of Justice of the European Union for a preliminary ruling, the decision of the national court or tribunal containing that question shall be notified to the United Kingdom.
2. The provisions of Union law governing procedures brought before the Court of Justice of the European Union in accordance with Article 267 TFEU shall apply mutatis mutandis to requests for a ruling of the Court of Justice of the European Union made pursuant to Article 158 of this Agreement.
& /en 272 The provisions of Union law governing the procedure before the Court of Justice of the European Union shall apply in respect of the proceedings before the Court of Justice of the European Union and requests for preliminary rulings made in accordance with Article 160 of this Agreement.
3. In the cases brought before the Court of Justice of the European Union in accordance with paragraph 1 and Articles 158 and 160 of this Agreement and Article 12 of the Protocol on the Sovereign Base Areas
(a) the United Kingdom may participate in the proceedings before the Court of Justice of the European Union in the same way as a Member State;
(b) lawyers authorised to practise before the courts or tribunals of the United Kingdom shall be entitled to represent or assist any parties to such proceedings before the Court of Justice of the European Union; in such cases those lawyers shall in every respect be treated as lawyers authorised to practise before courts of Member States representing or assisting a party before the Court of Justice of the European Union.
& /en 273 ARTICLE 162
Participation of the European Commission in cases pending in the United Kingdom
Where the consistent interpretation and application of this Agreement so requires, the European Commission may submit written observations to the courts and tribunals of the United Kingdom in pending cases where the interpretation of the Agreement is concerned. The European Commission may, with the permission of the court or tribunal in question, also make oral observations. The European Commission shall inform the United Kingdom of its intention to submit observations before formally making such submissions.
ARTICLE 163
Regular dialogue and exchange of information
In order to facilitate the consistent interpretation of this Agreement and in full deference to the independence of courts, the Court of Justice of the European Union and the United Kingdom's highest courts shall engage in regular dialogue, analogous to the dialogue in which the Court of Justice of the European Union engages with the highest courts of the Member States.
& /en 274 TITLE II
INSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 164
Joint Committee
1. A Joint Committee, comprising representatives of the Union and of the United Kingdom, is hereby established. The Joint Committee shall be co-chaired by the Union and the United Kingdom.
2. The Joint Committee shall meet at the request of the Union or the United Kingdom, and in any event shall meet at least once a year. The Joint Committee shall set its meeting schedule and its agenda by mutual consent. The work of the Joint Committee shall be governed by the rules of procedure set out in Annex VIII to this Agreement.
3. The Joint Committee shall be responsible for the implementation and application of this Agreement. The Union and the United Kingdom may each refer to the Joint Committee any issue relating to the implementation, application and interpretation of this Agreement.
& /en 275 4. The Joint Committee shall:
(a) supervise and facilitate the implementation and application of this Agreement;
(b) decide on the tasks of the specialised committees and supervise their work;
(c) seek appropriate ways and methods of preventing problems that might arise in areas covered by this Agreement or of resolving disputes that may arise regarding the interpretation and application of this Agreement;
(d) consider any matter of interest relating to an area covered by this Agreement;
(e) adopt decisions and make recommendations as set out in Article 166; and
(f) adopt amendments to this Agreement in the cases provided for in this Agreement.
5. The Joint Committee may:
(a) delegate responsibilities to specialised committees, except those responsibilities referred to in points (b), (e) and (f) of paragraph 4;
& /en 276 (b) establish specialised committees other than those established by Article 165, in order to assist the Joint Committee in the performance of its tasks;
(c) change the tasks assigned to specialised committees and dissolve any of those committees;
(d) except in relation to Parts One, Four and Six, until the end of the fourth year following the end of the transition period, adopt decisions amending this Agreement, provided that such amendments are necessary to correct errors, to address omissions or other deficiencies, or to address situations unforeseen when this Agreement was signed, and provided that such decisions may not amend the essential elements of this Agreement.
(e) adopt amendments to the rules of procedure set out in Annex VIII; and
(f) take such other actions in the exercise of its functions as decided by the Union and the United Kingdom.
6. The Joint Committee shall issue an annual report on the functioning of this Agreement.
& /en 277 ARTICLE 165
Specialised committees
1. The following specialised committees are hereby established:
(a) the Committee on citizens' rights;
(b) the Committee on the other separation provisions;
(c) the Committee on issues related to the implementation of the Protocol on Ireland/Northern Ireland;
(d) the Committee on issues related to the implementation of the Protocol relating to the Sovereign Base Areas in Cyprus;
(e) the Committee on issues related to the implementation of the Protocol on Gibraltar; and
(f) the Committee on the financial provisions.
Those specialised committees shall comprise representatives of the Union and representatives of the United Kingdom.
& /en 278 2. The work of the specialised committees shall be governed by the rules of procedure set out in Annex VIII to this Agreement.
Unless otherwise provided in this Agreement, or unless the co-chairs decide otherwise, the specialised committees shall meet at least once a year. Additional meetings may be held at the request of the Union, the United Kingdom, or of the Joint Committee. They shall be co-chaired by representatives of the Union and of the United Kingdom. The specialised committees shall set their meeting schedule and agenda by mutual consent. The specialised committees may draw up draft decisions and recommendations and refer them for adoption by the Joint Committee.
3. The Union and the United Kingdom shall ensure that their respective representatives on the specialised committees have the appropriate expertise with respect to the issues under discussion.
4. The specialised committees shall inform the Joint Committee of their meeting schedules and agenda sufficiently in advance of their meetings, and shall report to the Joint Committee on the results and conclusions of each of their meetings. The creation or existence of a specialised committee shall not prevent the Union or the United Kingdom from bringing any matter directly to the Joint Committee.
& /en 279 ARTICLE 166
Decisions and recommendations
1. The Joint Committee shall, for the purposes of this Agreement, have the power to adopt decisions in respect of all matters for which this Agreement so provides and to make appropriate recommendations to the Union and the United Kingdom.
2. The decisions adopted by the Joint Committee shall be binding on the Union and the United Kingdom, and the Union and the United Kingdom shall implement those decisions. They shall have the same legal effect as this Agreement.
3. The Joint Committee shall adopt its decisions and make its recommendations by mutual consent.
& /en 280 TITLE III
DISPUTE SETTLEMENT
ARTICLE 167
Cooperation
The Union and the United Kingdom shall at all times endeavour to agree on the interpretation and application of this Agreement, and shall make every attempt, through cooperation and consultations, to arrive at a mutually satisfactory resolution of any matter that might affect its operation.
ARTICLE 168
Exclusivity
For any dispute between the Union and the United Kingdom arising under this Agreement, the Union and the United Kingdom shall only have recourse to the procedures provided for in this Agreement.
& /en 281 ARTICLE 169
Consultations and communications within the Joint Committee
1. The Union and the United Kingdom shall endeavour to resolve any dispute regarding the interpretation and application of the provisions of this Agreement by entering into consultations in the Joint Committee in good faith, with the aim of reaching a mutually agreed solution. A party wishing to commence consultations shall provide written notice to the Joint Committee.
2. Any communication or notification between the Union and the United Kingdom provided for in this Title shall be made within the Joint Committee.
ARTICLE 170
Initiation of the arbitration procedure
1. Without prejudice to Article 160, if no mutually agreed solution has been reached within 3 months after a written notice has been provided to the Joint Committee in accordance with Article 169(1), the Union or the United Kingdom may request the establishment of an arbitration panel. Such request shall be made in writing to the other party and to the International Bureau of the Permanent Court of Arbitration. The request shall identify the subject matter of the dispute to be brought before the arbitration panel and a summary of the legal arguments in support of the request.
& /en 282 2. The Union and the United Kingdom may agree that the establishment of an arbitration panel may be requested before the expiry of the time limit laid down in paragraph 1.
ARTICLE 171
Establishment of the arbitration panel
1. The Joint Committee shall, no later than by the end of the transition period, establish a list of 25 persons who are willing and able to serve as members of an arbitration panel. To that end, the Union and the United Kingdom shall each propose ten persons. The Union and the United Kingdom shall also jointly propose five persons to act as chairperson of the arbitration panel. The Joint Committee shall ensure that the list complies with these requirements at any moment in time.
2. The list established pursuant to paragraph 1 shall only comprise persons whose independence is beyond doubt, who possess the qualifications required for appointment to the highest judicial office in their respective countries or who are jurisconsults of recognised competence, and who possess specialised knowledge or experience of Union law and public international law. That list shall not comprise persons who are members, officials or other servants of the Union institutions, of the government of a Member State, or of the government of the United Kingdom.
3. An arbitration panel shall be composed of five members.
& /en 283 4. Within 15 days of the date of a request in accordance with Article 170, the panel shall be established in accordance with paragraphs 5 and 6.
5. The Union and the United Kingdom shall each nominate two members from among the persons on the list established under paragraph 1. The chairperson shall be selected by consensus by the members of the panel from the persons jointly nominated by the Union and the United Kingdom to serve as a chairperson.
In the event that the members of the panel are unable to agree on the selection of the chairperson within the time limit laid down in paragraph 4, the Union or the United Kingdom may request the Secretary-General of the Permanent Court of Arbitration to select the chairperson by lot from among the persons jointly proposed by the Union and the United Kingdom to act as chairperson.
6. The Secretary-General of the Permanent Court of Arbitration shall make the selection referred to in second subparagraph of paragraph 5 within 5 days of the request referred to in paragraph 5. Representatives of the Union and of the United Kingdom shall be entitled to be present at the selection.
7. The date of establishment of the arbitration panel shall be the date on which the selection procedure is completed.
& /en 284 8. In the event that the list referred to in paragraph 1 has not been established by expiry of the time limit laid down in paragraph 4, the Union and the United Kingdom shall within 5 days each nominate two persons to serve as members of the panel. If persons have been proposed under paragraph 1, the nominations shall be made from among those persons. The chairperson shall then be appointed in accordance with the procedure set out in paragraph 5. In the event that the Union and the United Kingdom have not, within a further 5 days, jointly proposed at least one person to serve as chairperson, the Secretary-General of the Permanent Court of Arbitration shall within five days, after consultation with the Union and the United Kingdom, propose a chairperson who fulfils the requirements of paragraph 2. Unless either the Union or the United Kingdom objects to that proposal within 5 days, the person proposed by the Secretary-General of the Permanent Court of Arbitration shall be appointed.
9. In the event of failure to establish an arbitration panel within 3 months from the date of the request made pursuant to Article 170, the Secretary-General of the Permanent Court of Arbitration shall, upon request by either the Union or the United Kingdom, within 15 days of such request, after consultation with the Union and the United Kingdom, appoint persons who fulfil the requirements of paragraph 2 of this Article to constitute the arbitration panel.
& /en 285 ARTICLE 172
Rules of procedure
Dispute settlement procedures set out in this Title shall be governed by the rules of procedure set out in Part A of Annex IX ("Rules of Procedure"), the Joint Committee shall keep the functioning of those dispute settlement procedures under constant review and may amend the Rules of Procedure.
ARTICLE 173
Time-frame of the procedure before the arbitration panel
1. The arbitration panel shall notify its ruling to the Union, the United Kingdom and the Joint Committee within 12 months from the date of establishment of the arbitration panel. Where the arbitration panel considers that it cannot comply with this time limit, its chairperson shall notify the Union and the United Kingdom in writing, stating the reasons for the delay and the date on which the panel intends to conclude its work.
2. Within 10 days of the establishment of the arbitration panel the Union or the United Kingdom may submit a reasoned request to the effect that the case is urgent. In that case, the arbitration panel shall give a ruling on the urgency within 15 days from the receipt of such request. If it has determined the urgency of the case, the arbitration panel shall make every effort to notify its ruling to the Union and the United Kingdom within 6 months from the date of its establishment.
& /en 286 ARTICLE 174
Disputes raising questions of Union law
1. Where a dispute submitted to arbitration in accordance with this Title raises a question of interpretation of a concept of Union law, a question of interpretation of a provision of Union law referred to in this Agreement or a question of whether the United Kingdom has complied with its obligations under Article 89(2), the arbitration panel shall not decide on any such question. In such case, it shall request the Court of Justice of the European Union to give a ruling on the question. The Court of Justice of the European Union shall have jurisdiction to give such a ruling which shall be binding on the arbitration panel.
The arbitration panel shall make the request referred to in the first subparagraph after having heard the parties.
& /en 287 2. Without prejudice to the first sentence of the first subparagraph of paragraph 1, if the Union or the United Kingdom considers that a request in accordance with paragraph 1 is to be made, it may make submissions to the arbitration panel to that effect. In such case, the arbitration panel shall submit the request in accordance with paragraph 1 unless the question raised does not concern the interpretation of a concept of Union law, interpretation of a provision of Union law referred to in this Agreement, or does not concern whether the United Kingdom has complied with its obligations under Article 89(2). The arbitration panel shall provide reasons for its assessment. Within 10 days following the assessment, either party may request the arbitration panel to review its assessment, and a hearing shall be organised within 15 days of the request for the parties to be heard on the matter. The arbitration panel shall provide reasons for its assessment.
3. In the cases referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2, the time limits laid down in Article 173 shall be suspended until the Court of Justice of the European Union has given its ruling. The arbitration panel shall not be required to give its ruling less than 60 days from the date on which the Court of Justice of the European Union has given its ruling.
4. The first subparagraph of Article 161(2) and Article 161(3) shall apply mutatis mutandis to the procedures brought before the Court of Justice of the European Union in accordance with this Article.
& /en 288 ARTICLE 175
Compliance with the arbitration panel ruling
The arbitration panel ruling shall be binding on the Union and the United Kingdom. The Union and the United Kingdom shall take any measures necessary to comply in good faith with the arbitration panel ruling and shall endeavour to agree on the period of time to comply with the ruling in accordance with the procedure in Article 176.
ARTICLE 176
Reasonable period of time for compliance
1. No later than 30 days after the notification of the arbitration panel ruling to the Union and the United Kingdom, the respondent shall, if the panel has ruled in favour of the complainant, notify the complainant of the time it considers it will require for compliance (the "reasonable period of time").
2. If there is disagreement between the Union and the United Kingdom on the reasonable period of time to comply with the arbitration panel ruling, the complainant shall, within 40 days of the notification by the respondent under paragraph 1, request the original arbitration panel in writing to determine the length of the reasonable period of time. Such request shall be notified simultaneously to the respondent. The arbitration panel shall notify its decision on the period for compliance to the Union and the United Kingdom within 40 days of the date of submission of the request.
& /en 289 3. In the event of the original arbitration panel, or some of its members, being unable to reconvene to consider a request under paragraph 2, a new arbitration panel shall be established as set out in Article 171. The time limit for notifying the decision shall be 60 days from the date of establishment of the new arbitration panel.
4. The respondent shall inform the complainant in writing of its progress in complying with the arbitration panel ruling referred to in Article 173 at least 1 month before the expiry of the reasonable period of time.
5. The reasonable period of time may be extended by mutual agreement of the Union and the United Kingdom.
ARTICLE 177
Review of any measure taken to comply with the arbitration panel ruling
1. The respondent shall notify the complainant before the end of the reasonable period of time of any measure that it has taken to comply with the arbitration panel ruling.
2. If, at the end of the reasonable period, the complainant considers that the respondent has failed to comply with the arbitration panel ruling referred to in Article 173, the complainant may request the original arbitration panel in writing to rule on the matter. The arbitration panel shall notify its ruling to the Union and the United Kingdom within 90 days of the date of submission of the request.
& /en 290
. In the event of the original arbitration panel, or some of its members, being unable to reconvene to consider a request under paragraph 2, a new arbitration panel shall be established as set out in Article 171. The time limit for notifying the ruling shall be 60 days from the date of establishment of the new arbitration panel.
4. Where a case referred to the arbitration panel pursuant to paragraph 2 raises a question of interpretation of a concept of Union law or a question of interpretation of a provision of Union law referred to in this Agreement, Article 174 shall apply mutatis mutandis
ARTICLE 178
Temporary remedies in case of non-compliance
1. If the arbitration panel rules in accordance with Article 177(2) that the respondent has failed to comply with the arbitration panel ruling referred to in Article 173, at the request of the complainant it may impose a lump sum or penalty payment to be paid to the complainant. In determining the lump sum or penalty payment, the arbitration panel shall take into account the seriousness of the non-compliance and underlying breach of obligation, the duration of the non-compliance and underlying breach of obligation.
& /en 291 2. If, 1 month after the arbitration panel ruling referred to in paragraph 1, the respondent has failed to pay any lump sum or penalty payment imposed on it, or if, 6 months after the arbitration panel ruling referred to in Article 177(2), the respondent persists in not complying with the arbitration panel ruling referred to in Article 173, the complainant shall be entitled, upon notification to the respondent, to suspend obligations arising from:
(a) any provision of this Agreement other than those contained in Part Two; or
(b) parts of any other agreement between the Union and the United Kingdom under the conditions set out in that agreement.
The notification shall specify the provisions which the complainant intends to suspend. Before deciding to suspend parts of an agreement referred to in point (b) the complainant shall first consider whether the suspension of the provision of this Agreement in accordance with point (a) would be an appropriate response to the breach. Any suspension shall be proportionate to the breach of obligation concerned, taking into account the gravity of the breach and the rights in question and, where the suspension is based on the fact that the respondent persists in not complying with the arbitration panel ruling referred to in Article 173, whether a penalty payment has been imposed on the respondent and has been paid or is still being paid by the latter.
The complainant may implement the suspension at any moment but not earlier than 10 days after the date of the notification, unless the respondent has requested arbitration under paragraph 3.
& /en 292 3. If the respondent considers that the extent of the suspension set out in the notification referred to in paragraph 2 is not proportionate, it may request the original arbitration panel in writing to rule on the matter. Such request shall be notified to the complainant before the expiry of the 10-day period referred to in paragraph 2. The arbitration panel shall notify its ruling to the Union and the United Kingdom within 60 days of the date of submission of the request. Obligations shall not be suspended until the arbitration panel has notified its ruling, and any suspension shall be consistent with the arbitration panel ruling.
4. In the event of the original arbitration panel, or some of its members, being unable to reconvene to consider a request under paragraph 2, a new arbitration panel shall be established as set out in Article 171. In such cases, the period for notifying the ruling shall be 90 days from the date of establishment of the new arbitration panel.
5. The suspension of obligations shall be temporary and shall be applied only until any measure found to be inconsistent with the provisions of this Agreement has been withdrawn or amended, so as to achieve conformity with the provisions of this Agreement, or until the Union and the United Kingdom have agreed to otherwise settle the dispute.
& /en 293 ARTICLE 179
Review of any measure taken after temporary remedies
1. Where the complainant has suspended obligations in accordance with Article 178 or where the arbitration panel has imposed a penalty payment on the respondent in accordance with Article 178(1), the respondent shall notify the complainant of any measure it has taken to comply with the ruling of the arbitration panel and of its request for an end to the suspension of obligations applied by the complainant or to the penalty payment.
2. If the Union and the United Kingdom do not reach an agreement on whether the notified measure brings the respondent into conformity with the provisions of this Agreement within 45 days of the date of submission of the notification, either party may request the original arbitration panel in writing to rule on the matter. Such request shall be notified simultaneously to the other party. The arbitration panel ruling shall be notified to the Union and the United Kingdom and to the Joint Committee within 75 days of the date of submission of the request.
If the arbitration panel rules that the respondent has brought itself into conformity with this Agreement, or if the complainant does not, within 45 days of the submission of the notification referred to in paragraph 1, request that the original arbitration panel rule on the matter:
(a) the suspension of obligations shall be terminated within 15 days of either the ruling of the arbitration panel or the end of the 45-day period;
& /en 294 (b) the penalty payment shall be terminated on the day after either the ruling of the arbitration panel or the end of the 45-day period.
3. In the event of the original arbitration panel, or some of its members, being unable to reconvene to consider a request under paragraph 2, a new arbitration panel shall be established as set out in Article 171. The period for notifying the ruling shall in that case be 90 days from the date of establishment of the new arbitration panel.
4. Where a case referred to the arbitration panel pursuant to paragraph 2 raises a question of interpretation of a concept of Union law or a question of interpretation of a provision of Union law referred to in this Agreement, Article 174 shall apply mutatis mutandis
ARTICLE 180
Arbitration panel decisions and rulings
1. The arbitration panel shall make every effort to take decisions by consensus. Where, nevertheless, a decision cannot be arrived at by consensus, the matter at issue shall be decided by majority vote. However, in no case dissenting opinions of members of an arbitration panel shall be published.
& /en 295 2. Any ruling of the arbitration panel shall be binding on the Union and the United Kingdom. The ruling shall set out the findings of fact, the applicability of the relevant provisions of this Agreement, and the reasoning behind any findings and conclusions. The Union and the United Kingdom shall make the arbitration panel rulings and decisions publicly available in their entirety, subject to the protection of confidential information.
ARTICLE 181
Members of an arbitration panel
1. The members of an arbitration panel shall be independent, shall serve in their individual capacity and shall not take instructions from any organisation or government, and shall comply with the Code of Conduct set out in Part B of Annex IX. The Joint Committee may amend that Code of Conduct.
2. The members of an arbitration panel shall, as from the establishment thereof, enjoy immunity from legal proceedings in the Union and the United Kingdom with respect to acts performed by them in the exercise of their functions on that arbitration panel.
& /en 296 TITLE IV
FINAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 182
Protocols and Annexes
The Protocol on Ireland / Northern Ireland, the Protocol relating to the Sovereign Base Areas in Cyprus, the Protocol on Gibraltar, and Annexes I to IX shall form an integral part of this Agreement.
ARTICLE 183
Authentic texts and depositary
This Agreement is drawn up in a single original in the Bulgarian, Croatian, Czech, Danish, Dutch, English, Estonian, Finnish, French, German, Greek, Hungarian, Irish, Italian, Latvian, Lithuanian, Maltese, Polish, Portuguese, Romanian, Slovak, Slovenian, Spanish and Swedish languages, the texts in each of these languages being equally authentic.
The Secretary General of the Council shall be the depositary of this Agreement.
& /en 297 ARTICLE 184
Negotiations on the future relationship
The Union and the United Kingdom shall use their best endeavours, in good faith and in full respect of their respective legal orders, to take the necessary steps to negotiate expeditiously the agreements governing their future relationship referred to in the political declaration of [DD/MM/2018] and to conduct the relevant procedures for the ratification or conclusion of those agreements, with a view to ensuring that those agreements apply, to the extent possible, as from the end of the transition period.
& /en 298 ARTICLE 185
Entry into force and application
This Agreement shall enter into force on 30 March 2019. In the event that, prior to that date, the depositary of this Agreement has not received the written notification of the completion of the necessary internal procedures by the Union and the United Kingdom, this Agreement shall not enter into force.
When making the written notification referred to in this Article, the Union, in respect of any Member State which has raised reasons related to fundamental principles of national law of that Member State, may declare that, during the transition period, in addition to the grounds for non
xecution of a European arrest warrant referred to in the Framework Decision 2002/584/JHA, the executing judicial authorities of that Member State may refuse to surrender its nationals to the United Kingdom pursuant to a European Arrest Warrant. In such a case, the United Kingdom may declare, no later than 1 month after the receipt of the Union's declaration, that its executing judicial authorities may refuse to surrender its nationals to that Member State.
Parts Two and Three, with the exception of Article 19, Article 34(1), Article 44, and Article 96(1), as well as Title I of Part Six and Articles 169 to 181, shall apply as from the end of the transition period.
& /en 299 The Protocol on Ireland/Northern Ireland shall apply as from the end of the transition period, with the exception of the following provisions of that Protocol that shall apply as from the entry into force of this Agreement:
Articles 1 to
, Article 14(3), Article 16, Article 17(1) to (4), Article 17(6) and Article 21;
the last sentence of the third subparagraph of Article 6(1), the fourth subparagraph of Article 6(1), the last sentence of the fifth subparagraph of Article 6(1), and the sixth subparagraph of Article 6(1);
the second sentence of the first subparagraph of Article 6(2);
the last sentence of Article 12(2);
the third sentence of Article 4(3) of Annex 2;
Article 5(2) of Annex 2;
the second sentence of Article 4(1) of Annex 3;
Article
1) of Annex 3;
the first sentence of the second subparagraph of Article 13 of Annex 3;
Articles 1(4) and 2(3) of Annex
the last sentence of Article 7(2) of Annex 4;
the first subparagraph of Article 8 of Annex 4;
the first subparagraph of Annex 9
& /en 300 The Protocol relating to the Sovereign Base Areas of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland in Cyprus, with the exception of Article 11 thereof, shall apply as from the end of the transition period.
The Protocol on Gibraltar, with the exception of Article 1 thereof, shall cease to apply at the end of the transition period.
Done on ...
& /en 301 PROTOCOLS
& /en 302 PROTOCOL ON IRELAND/NORTHERN IRELAND
The Union and the United Kingdom,
HAVING REGARD to the historic ties and enduring nature of the bilateral relationship between Ireland and the United Kingdom,
RECALLING that the United Kingdom's withdrawal from the Union presents a significant and unique challenge to the island of Ireland, and reaffirming that the achievements, benefits and commitments of the peace process will remain of paramount importance to peace, stability and reconciliation there,
RECOGNISING that it is necessary to address the unique circumstances on the island of Ireland through a unique solution in order to ensure the orderly withdrawal of the United Kingdom from the Union,
RECALLING that the Withdrawal Agreement, which is based on Article 50 TEU, does not aim at establishing a permanent future relationship between the Union and the United Kingdom,
RECALLING the Union's and the United Kingdom's intention to replace the backstop solution on Northern Ireland by a subsequent agreement that establishes alternative arrangements for ensuring the absence of a hard border on the island of Ireland on a permanent footing;
& /en 303 HAVING REGARD to the Union and to the United Kingdom's common objective of a close future relationship, which will establish ambitious customs arrangements that build on the single customs territory provided for in this Protocol, in full respect of their respective legal orders,
AFFIRMING that the Good Friday or Belfast Agreement of 10 April 1998 between the Government of the United Kingdom, the Government of Ireland and the other participants in the multi-party negotiations (the "1998 Agreement"), which is annexed to the British-Irish Agreement of the same date (the "British-Irish Agreement"), including its subsequent implementation agreements and arrangements, should be protected in all its parts,
RECOGNISING that cooperation between Northern Ireland and Ireland is a central part of the 1998 Agreement and is essential for achieving reconciliation and the normalisation of relationships on the island of Ireland, and recalling the roles, functions and safeguards of the Northern Ireland Executive, the Northern Ireland Assembly, and the North-South Ministerial Council (including cross-community provisions), as set out in the 1998 Agreement,
NOTING that Union law has provided a supporting framework to the provisions on Rights, Safeguards and Equality of Opportunity of the 1998 Agreement,
RECOGNISING that Irish citizens in Northern Ireland, by virtue of their Union citizenship, will continue to enjoy, exercise and have access to rights, opportunities and benefits, and that this Protocol should respect and be without prejudice to the rights, opportunities and identity that come with citizenship of the Union for the people of Northern Ireland who choose to assert their right to Irish citizenship as defined in Annex 2 of the British-Irish Agreement "Declaration on the Provisions of Paragraph (vi) of Article 1 in Relation to Citizenship",
& /en 304 RECALLING the commitment of the United Kingdom to protect North-South cooperation and its guarantee of avoiding a hard border, including any physical infrastructure or related checks and controls, and bearing in mind that any future arrangements must be compatible with these overarching requirements,
NOTING that nothing in this Protocol prevents the United Kingdom from ensuring unfettered market access for goods moving from Northern Ireland to the rest of the United Kingdom's internal market,
UNDERLINING the parties' shared aim of avoiding, to the extent possible in accordance with applicable legislation and taking into account their respective regulatory regimes as well as their implementation, controls at the ports and airports of Northern Ireland,
RECALLING that the Joint Report from the negotiators of the European Union and the United Kingdom Government on progress during phase 1 of negotiations under Article 50 TEU on the United Kingdom's orderly withdrawal from the European Union of 8 December 2017 outlines three different scenarios for protecting North-South cooperation and avoiding a hard border, but that this Protocol is based on the third scenario of maintaining full alignment with those rules of the Union's internal market and the customs union which, now or in the future, support North-South cooperation, the all-island economy and the protection of the 1998 Agreement, to apply unless and until an alternative arrangement implementing another scenario is agreed,
NOTING that, in accordance with Article 132 of the Withdrawal Agreement, the transition period may be extended by mutual consent,
& /en 305 RECALLING that the two Parties have carried out a mapping exercise, which shows that North-South cooperation relies to a significant extent on a common European Union legal and policy framework,
NOTING that therefore the United Kingdom's departure from the European Union gives rise to substantial challenges to the maintenance and development of North-South cooperation,
RECALLING that the United Kingdom remains committed to protecting and supporting continued North-South and East-West cooperation across the full range of political, economic, security, societal and agricultural contexts and frameworks of cooperation, including the continued operation of the North-South implementation bodies,
ACKNOWLEDGING the need for this Protocol to be implemented so as to maintain the necessary conditions for continued North-South cooperation, including for possible new arrangements in accordance with the 1998 Agreement,
RECALLING the Union and the United Kingdom's commitments to the North South PEACE and INTERREG funding programmes under the current multi-annual financial framework and to the maintaining of the current funding proportions for the future programme,
AFFIRMING the commitment of the United Kingdom to facilitate the efficient and timely transit through its territory of goods moving from Ireland to another Member State or another third country, or vice versa,
& /en 306 DETERMINED that the application of this Protocol should impact as little as possible on the everyday life of communities both in Ireland and Northern Ireland,
MINDFUL that the rights and obligations of Ireland under the rules of the Union's internal market and customs union must be fully respected,
HAVE AGREED UPON the following provisions, which shall be annexed to the Agreement on the withdrawal of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland from the European Union and the European Atomic Energy Community ("Withdrawal Agreement"):
& /en 307 ARTICLE
Objectives and relationship to subsequent agreement
1. This Protocol is without prejudice to the provisions of the 1998 Agreement regarding the constitutional status of Northern Ireland and the principle of consent, which provides that any change in that status can only be made with the consent of a majority of its people.
2. This Protocol respects the essential State functions and territorial integrity of the United Kingdom.
3. This Protocol sets out arrangements necessary to address the unique circumstances on the island of Ireland, maintain the necessary conditions for continued North-South cooperation, avoid a hard border and protect the 1998 Agreement in all its dimensions.
4. The objective of the Withdrawal Agreement is not to establish a permanent relationship between the Union and the United Kingdom. The provisions of this Protocol are therefore intended to apply only temporarily, taking into account the commitments of the Parties set out in Article 2(1). The provisions of this Protocol shall apply unless and until they are superseded, in whole or in part, by a subsequent agreement.
& /en 308 ARTICLE
Subsequent agreement
1. The Union and the United Kingdom shall use their best endeavours to conclude, by 31 December 2020, an agreement which supersedes this Protocol in whole or in part.
2. Any subsequent agreement between the Union and the United Kingdom shall indicate the parts of this Protocol which it supersedes. Once a subsequent agreement between the Union and the United Kingdom becomes applicable after the entry into force of the Withdrawal Agreement, this Protocol shall then, from the date of application of such subsequent agreement and in accordance with the provisions of that agreement setting out the effect of that agreement on this Protocol, not apply or shall cease to apply, as the case may be, in whole or in part, notwithstanding Article 20.
ARTICLE
Extension of the transition period
The United Kingdom, having had regard to progress made towards conclusion of the agreement referred to in Articles 1(4) and 2(1) of this Protocol, may at any time before 1 July 2020 request the extension of the transition period referred to in Article 126 of the Withdrawal Agreement. If the United Kingdom makes such a request, the transition period may be extended in accordance with Article 132 of the Withdrawal Agreement.
& /en 309 ARTICLE
Rights of individuals
1. The United Kingdom shall ensure that no diminution of rights, safeguards and equality of opportunity as set out in that part of the 1998 Agreement entitled Rights, Safeguards and Equality of Opportunity results from its withdrawal from the Union, including in the area of protection against discrimination as enshrined in the provisions of Union law listed in Annex 1 to this Protocol, and shall implement this paragraph through dedicated mechanisms.
2. The United Kingdom shall continue to facilitate the related work of the institutions and bodies set up pursuant to the 1998 Agreement, including the Northern Ireland Human Rights Commission, the Equality Commission for Northern Ireland and the Joint Committee of representatives of the Human Rights Commissions of Northern Ireland and Ireland, in upholding human rights and equality standards.
ARTICLE
Common Travel Area
1. The United Kingdom and Ireland may continue to make arrangements between themselves relating to the movement of persons between their territories (the "Common Travel Area"), while fully respecting the rights of natural persons conferred by Union law.
& /en 310 2. The United Kingdom shall ensure that the Common Travel Area and the associated rights and privileges can continue to apply without affecting the obligations of Ireland under Union law, in particular with respect to free movement for Union citizens and their family members, irrespective of their nationality, to, from and within Ireland.
ARTICLE
Single customs territory, movement of goods
1. Until the future relationship becomes applicable, a single customs territory between the Union and the United Kingdom shall be established ("the single customs territory"). Accordingly, Northern Ireland is in the same customs territory as Great Britain.
The single customs territory shall comprise:
(a) the customs territory of the Union defined in Article 4 of Regulation (EU) No 952/2013; and
(b) the customs territory of the United Kingdom.
& /en 311 The rules set out in Annex 2 to this Protocol shall apply in respect of all trade in goods between the territories referred to in the second subparagraph, as well as, where so provided, between the single customs territory and third countries. With a view to ensuring the maintenance of the level playing field conditions required for the proper functioning of this paragraph, the provisions set out in Annex 4 to this Protocol shall apply. Where appropriate, the Joint Committee may modify Annex 4 in order to lay down higher standards for these level playing field conditions.
The Joint Committee shall adopt before 1 July 2020 the detailed rules relating to trade in goods between the two parts of the single customs territory for the implementation of this paragraph. In the absence of such a decision adopted before 1 July 2020, Annex 3 shall apply.
By derogation from the third subparagraph, fishery and aquaculture products, as set out in Annex I to Regulation (EU) 1379/2013 ("fishery and aquaculture products"), shall not be covered by the rules set out in Annexes 2 and 4, as well as the rules referred to in the fourth subparagraph, unless an agreement on access to waters and fishing opportunities is applicable between the Union and the United Kingdom. In accordance with Article 184 of the Withdrawal Agreement, the Union and the United Kingdom shall use their best endeavours to conclude and ratify such an agreement before 1 July 2020.
The Joint Committee may adopt decisions amending Annex 3 to this Protocol, where such amendments are necessary for the proper functioning of this paragraph. Such decisions may not amend the essential elements of this Protocol or the Withdrawal Agreement.
& /en 312 The second subparagraph of this paragraph is without prejudice to the specific arrangements set out in the Protocol relating to the Sovereign Base Areas of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland in Cyprus.
2. Legislation as defined in point (2) of Article 5 of Regulation (EU) No 952/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council
shall apply to and in the United Kingdom in respect of Northern Ireland (not including the territorial waters of the United Kingdom). However, the Joint Committee shall establish the conditions, including in quantitative terms, under which certain fishery and aquaculture products brought into the customs territory of the Union defined in Article 4 of Regulation (EU) No 952/2013 by vessels flying the flag of the United Kingdom and registered in Northern Ireland are exempted from duties.
The provisions of Union law listed in Annex 5 to this Protocol shall also apply, under the conditions set out therein, to and in the United Kingdom in respect of Northern Ireland.
Articles 30 and 110 TFEU shall apply to and in the United Kingdom in respect of Northern Ireland. Quantitative restrictions on exports and imports shall be prohibited between the Union and Northern Ireland.

Regulation (EU) No 952/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 9 October 2013 laying down the Union Customs Code (OJ L 269, 10.10.2013, p. 1).
& /en 313 ARTICLE
Protection of the UK internal market
1. Nothing in this Protocol shall prevent the United Kingdom from ensuring unfettered market access for goods moving from Northern Ireland to the rest of the United Kingdom's internal market. Provisions of Union law made applicable by this Protocol which prohibit or restrict the exportation of goods shall only be applied to trade between the territories referred to in Article 6(1) to the extent strictly required by any international obligations incumbent on the Union. The United Kingdom shall ensure the full protection of international requirements and commitments that are relevant to the prohibitions and restrictions of exportation of goods from the Union to third countries as set out in Union law.
2. Having regard to Northern Ireland's integral place in the United Kingdom's internal market, the Union and the United Kingdom shall use their best endeavours to facilitate, in accordance with applicable legislation and taking into account their respective regulatory regimes as well as their implementation, the trade between the part of the territory of the United Kingdom to which Regulation (EU) No 952/2013 applies by virtue of Article 6(2) and other parts of the territory of the United Kingdom. The Joint Committee shall keep under constant review the application of this paragraph and adopt appropriate recommendations with a view to avoiding, to the extent possible, controls at the ports and airports of Northern Ireland.
& /en 314 3. Nothing in this Protocol shall prevent a product originating from Northern Ireland from being presented as originating from the United Kingdom when placed on the market in Great Britain.
4. Nothing in this Protocol shall affect the law of the United Kingdom regulating the placing on the market in other parts of the United Kingdom of goods from Northern Ireland that conform with or benefit from technical regulations, assessments, registrations, certificates, approvals or authorisations governed by provisions of Union law referred to in Annex 5.
ARTICLE
Technical regulations, assessments, registrations, certificates, approvals and authorisations
1. Without prejudice to the provisions of Union law referred to in Annex 5, the lawfulness of placing goods on the market in Northern Ireland shall be governed by the law of the United Kingdom as well as, as regards goods imported from the Union, by Articles 34 and 36 TFEU.
2. Where provisions of Union law made applicable by this Protocol provide for the indication of a Member State, including in abbreviated form, as markings, labelling, tags, or by any other means, the United Kingdom in respect of Northern Ireland shall be indicated as "UK(NI)" or "United Kingdom (Northern Ireland)". Where provisions of Union law made applicable by this Protocol provide for the indication in the form of a numeric code, the United Kingdom in respect of Northern Ireland shall be indicated with a distinguishable numeric code.
& /en 315 3. By way of derogation from Article 15(1) of this Protocol and from Article 7 of the Withdrawal Agreement, in respect of the recognition in one Member State of technical regulations, assessments, registrations, certificates, approvals and authorisations issued by the authorities of another Member State, or by a body established in another Member State, references to Member States in provisions of Union law made applicable by this Protocol shall not be read as including the United Kingdom in respect of Northern Ireland as regards technical regulations, assessments, registrations, certificates, approvals and authorisations issued by the authorities of the United Kingdom or by bodies established in the United Kingdom.
The first subparagraph shall not apply to registrations, certifications, approvals and authorisations of sites, installations or premises in Northern Ireland issued by competent authorities of the United Kingdom, where the registration, certification, approval or authorisation may require an inspection of the sites, installations or premises.
The first subparagraph shall not apply to veterinary certificates, and official labels for plant reproductive material, required in provisions of Union law made applicable by this protocol.
The first subparagraph is without prejudice to the validity, in Northern Ireland, of assessments, registrations, certificates, approvals and authorisations issued, on the basis of provisions of Union law made applicable by this Protocol, by the competent authorities of the United Kingdom or by bodies established in the United Kingdom. Any conformity marking, logo or similar required by the provisions of Union law made applicable by this Protocol which is affixed by economic operators based on the assessment, registration, certificate, approval or authorisation issued by competent authorities of the United Kingdom or by bodies established in the United Kingdom shall be accompanied by the indication "UK(NI)".
& /en 316 The United Kingdom in respect of Northern Ireland may not initiate objection, safeguard or arbitration procedures provided for in provisions of Union law made applicable by this Protocol as far as these procedures concern the technical regulations, standards, assessments, registrations, certificates, approvals and authorisations issued by competent authorities of the Member State or by bodies established in Member States.
The first subparagraph does not prevent the test and release by a qualified person in Northern Ireland of a batch of a medicinal product imported into or manufactured in Northern Ireland.
ARTICLE
VAT and excise
The provisions of Union law listed in Annex
to this Protocol concerning goods shall apply to and in the United Kingdom in respect of Northern Ireland.
The Joint Committee shall regularly discuss the implementation of this Article, and where appropriate, adopt the necessary measures for its proper application.
& /en 317 ARTICLE 10
Agriculture and environment
The provisions of Union law listed in Annex 5 to this Protocol shall apply, under the conditions set out therein, to and in the United Kingdom in respect of Northern Ireland.
ARTICLE 11
Single electricity market
The provisions of Union law governing wholesale electricity markets listed in Annex 7 to this Protocol shall apply, under the conditions set out therein, to and in the United Kingdom in respect of Northern Ireland.
ARTICLE 12
State aid
1. The provisions of Union law listed in Annex 8 to this Protocol shall apply to the United Kingdom, including with regard to measures supporting the production of and trade in agricultural products in Northern Ireland, in respect of measures that affect that trade between the part of the territory of the United Kingdom to which Regulation (EU) No 952/2013 applies by virtue of Article 6(2) of this Protocol and the Union which is subject to this Protocol.
& /en 318 2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, the provisions of Union law referred to in that paragraph shall not apply with respect to measures taken by the United Kingdom authorities supporting the production of and trade in agricultural products in Northern Ireland up to a determined maximum overall annual level of support, and provided that a determined minimum percentage of that exempted support complies with the provisions of Annex 2 to the WTO Agreement on Agriculture. The determination of the maximum exempted overall annual level of support and the minimum percentage shall be governed by the procedures set out in Annex 9.
3. Where the European Commission examines information regarding a measure by the United Kingdom authorities that may constitute unlawful aid subject to paragraph 1, it shall ensure that the United Kingdom is kept fully and regularly informed of the progress and outcome of the examination of that measure
The European Commission and the independent authority referred to in Article 9 of Annex 4 shall establish the administrative arrangements necessary to the proper implementation of this Article and Part Four of Annex 4 respectively, and keep those arrangements under review.
& /en 319 ARTICLE 13
Other areas of North-South cooperation
1. Consistent with the arrangements set out in Article 6(2) and Articles 7 to 12 of this Protocol, and in full respect of Union law, this Protocol shall be implemented and applied so as to maintain the necessary conditions for continued North-South cooperation, including in the areas of environment, health, agriculture, transport, education and tourism, as well as in the areas of energy, telecommunications, broadcasting, inland fisheries, justice and security, higher education and sport. In full respect of Union law, the United Kingdom and Ireland may continue to make new arrangements that build on the provisions of the 1998 Agreement in other areas of North-South cooperation on the island of Ireland.
2. The Joint Committee shall keep under constant review the extent to which the implementation and application of this Protocol maintains the necessary conditions for North-South cooperation. The Joint Committee may make appropriate recommendations to the Union and the United Kingdom in this respect, including on recommendation from the Specialised Committee.
ARTICLE 14
Implementation, application, supervision and enforcement
1. Without prejudice to paragraph 4, the authorities of the United Kingdom shall be responsible for implementing and applying the provisions of Union law made applicable by this Protocol to and in the United Kingdom in respect of Northern Ireland.
& /en 320 2. Without prejudice to paragraph 4, Union representatives shall have the right to be present during and receive, upon request, all relevant information relating to any activities of the United Kingdom authorities related to the implementation and application of provisions of Union law made applicable by this Protocol. The United Kingdom shall facilitate that presence of Union representatives and provide them with the information requested. Where the Union representative requests the United Kingdom authorities to carry out control measures in individual cases for duly stated reasons, the United Kingdom authorities shall carry out those control measures.
3. The practical working arrangements related to the exercise of the rights of Union representatives referred to in paragraph 2 shall be determined by the Joint Committee, upon proposal from the Specialised Committee.
4. As regards Article 6(2), and Articles 8 to 12 of this Protocol, as well as Article 7(1) of Annex 4 to this Protocol in respect of measures of the Member States, the institutions, bodies, offices, and agencies of the Union shall in relation to the United Kingdom, and natural and legal persons residing or established in the territory of the United Kingdom, have the powers conferred upon them by Union law. In particular, the Court of Justice of the European Union shall have jurisdiction as provided for in the Treaties in this respect. The second and third subparagraphs of Article 267 TFEU shall apply to and in the United Kingdom in this respect.
5. Acts of the institutions, bodies, offices, and agencies adopted in accordance with paragraph 4 shall produce in respect of and in the United Kingdom the same legal effects as those which they produce within the Union and its Member States.
& /en 321 6. When representing or assisting a party in relation to administrative procedures arising from the exercise of the powers of the institutions, bodies, offices, and agencies of the Union referred to in paragraph 4, lawyers authorised to practise before the courts or tribunals of the United Kingdom shall in every respect be treated as lawyers authorised to practise before courts or tribunals of Member States who represent or assist a party in relation to such administrative procedures.
7. In cases brought before the Court of Justice of the European Union pursuant to paragraph 4:
(a) the United Kingdom may participate in the proceedings before the Court of Justice of the European Union in the same way as a Member State;
(b) lawyers authorised to practise before the courts or tribunals of the United Kingdom may represent or assist a party before the Court of Justice of the European Union in such proceedings and shall in every respect be treated as lawyers authorised to practise before courts or tribunals of Member States representing or assisting a party before the Court of Justice of the European Union.
ARTICLE 15
Common provisions
1. For the purposes of this Protocol, any reference to the United Kingdom in the applicable provisions of the Withdrawal Agreement shall be read as referring to the United Kingdom or the United Kingdom in respect of Northern Ireland, as the case may be.
& /en 322 Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Protocol, any reference in the applicable provisions of the Withdrawal Agreement and of this Protocol, as well as in the provisions of Union law made applicable to and in the United Kingdom in respect of Northern Ireland by this Protocol, to the territory defined in Article 4 of Regulation (EU) No 952/2013 shall be read as including the part of the territory of the United Kingdom to which Regulation (EU) No 952/2013 applies by virtue of Article 6(2) of this Protocol.
For the purposes of the first subparagraph of Article 6(1), the term "customs territory" shall have the same meaning as in Article XXIV of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994.
Titles I and III of Part Three, as well as Part Six shall apply without prejudice to the provisions of this Protocol.
2. For the purposes of Article 6(1) of this Protocol:
"third country" shall mean a country or territory which does not belong to the customs territories referred to in Article 6(1) of this Protocol
"part of the single customs territory" shall mean, on the one hand, the customs territory of the Union defined in Article 4 of Regulation (EU) No 952/2013 and, on the other hand, the United Kingdom customs territory.
3. Notwithstanding Articles 4(4) and 4(5) of the Withdrawal Agreement, the provisions of this Protocol referring to Union law or concepts or provisions thereof shall in their implementation and application be interpreted in conformity with the relevant case law of the Court of Justice of the European Union.
& /en 323 4. Notwithstanding Article 6(1) of the Withdrawal Agreement, and unless otherwise provided, where this Protocol makes reference to a Union act, the reference to that act shall be read as referring to it as amended or replaced.
5. Where the Union adopts a new act that falls within the scope of this Protocol, but neither amends nor replaces a Union act listed in the Annexes to this Protocol, the Union shall inform the United Kingdom of this adoption in the Joint Committee. Upon request of the Union or the United Kingdom, the Joint Committee shall hold an exchange of views on the implications of the newly adopted act for the proper functioning of this Protocol within 6 weeks after the request.
As soon as reasonably practical after the Union has informed the United Kingdom in the Joint Committee, the Joint Committee shall either:
(a) adopt a decision adding the newly adopted act to the relevant Annex of this Protocol; or
(b) where an agreement on adding the newly adopted act to the relevant Annex to this Protocol cannot be reached, examine all further possibilities to maintain the good functioning of this Protocol and take any decision necessary to this effect.
If the Joint Committee has not taken a decision within a reasonable time, the Union shall be entitled, after giving notice to the United Kingdom, to take appropriate remedial measures. Such measures shall take effect at the earliest 6 months after the Union informed the United Kingdom in accordance with the first subparagraph, but in no event earlier than the date on which the newly adopted act is implemented in the Union.
& /en 324 6. By way of derogation from paragraph 1 of this Article and from Article 7 of the Withdrawal Agreement, unless the Union considers that full or partial access by the United Kingdom or the United Kingdom in respect of Northern Ireland, as the case may be, is strictly necessary to enable the United Kingdom to comply with its obligations under this Protocol, including because access to the relevant information cannot be facilitated by the working group referred to in Article 17 of this Protocol or by any other practical means, the following shall apply: in respect of access to any network, information system, or database established on the basis of Union law, references to Member States and competent authorities of Member States in provisions of Union law made applicable by this Protocol shall not be read as including the United Kingdom or the United Kingdom in respect of Northern Ireland, as the case may be.
7. Authorities of the United Kingdom shall not act as leading authority for risk assessments, examinations, approvals and authorisation procedures provided for in Union law made applicable by this Protocol.
8. Articles 346 and 347 TFEU shall apply to this Protocol as regards measures taken by a Member State or by the United Kingdom in respect of Northern Ireland.
& /en 325 ARTICLE 16
Specialised Committee
The Committee on issues related to the implementation of the Protocol on Ireland/Northern Ireland established by Article 165 of the Withdrawal Agreement ("Specialised Committee") shall:
(a) facilitate the implementation and application of this Protocol;
(b) examine proposals concerning the implementation and application of this Protocol from the North-South Ministerial Council and North-South Implementation bodies set up under the 1998 Agreement;
(c) consider any matter of relevance to Article 4 of this Protocol brought to its attention by the Northern Ireland Human Rights Commission, the Equality Commission for Northern Ireland, and the Joint Committee of representatives of the Human Rights Commissions of Northern Ireland and Ireland;
(d) discuss any point raised by the Union or the United Kingdom that is of relevance to this Protocol and gives rise to a difficulty; and
(e) make recommendations to the Joint Committee as regards the functioning of this Protocol.
& /en 326 ARTICLE 17
Joint consultative working group
1. A joint consultative working group on the implementation of the Protocol is hereby established. It shall serve as a forum for the exchange of information and mutual consultation.
2. The working group shall be composed of representatives of the Union and the United Kingdom and shall carry out its functions under the supervision of the Specialised Committee, to which it shall report. The working group shall have no power to take binding decisions other than that referred to in paragraph 6.
3. Within the working group:
(a) the Union and the United Kingdom shall, in a timely manner, exchange information about planned, ongoing and final relevant implementation measures in relation to the Union acts listed in the Annexes to this Protocol;
(b) the Union shall inform the United Kingdom about planned Union acts within the scope of this Protocol, including those amending or replacing the Union acts listed in the Annexes to this Protocol;
(c) the Union shall provide to the United Kingdom all information the Union considers relevant to allow the United Kingdom to fully comply with its obligations under the Protocol; and
& /en 327 (d) the United Kingdom shall provide to the Union all information that Member States provide to one another or the Union institutions, bodies, offices or agencies pursuant to the Union acts listed in the Annexes to this Protocol.
4. The working group shall be co-chaired by the Union and the United Kingdom.
5. The working group shall meet at least once a month, unless otherwise decided by the Union and the United Kingdom by mutual consent. Where necessary, information referred to in points (c) and (d) of paragraph 3 can be exchanged between meetings.
6. The working group shall adopt its own rules of procedure by mutual consent.
7. The Union shall ensure that all views expressed and information (including technical and scientific data) provided by the United Kingdom in the working group are communicated to the relevant Union institutions, bodies, offices and agencies without undue delay.
& /en 328 ARTICLE 18
Safeguards
1. If the application of this Protocol leads to serious economic, societal or environmental difficulties liable to persist, or to diversion of trade, the Union or the United Kingdom may unilaterally take appropriate measures. Such safeguard measures shall be restricted with regard to their scope and duration to what is strictly necessary in order to remedy the situation. Priority shall be given to such measures as will least disturb the functioning of this Protocol.
2. If a safeguard measure taken by the Union or the United Kingdom, as the case may be, in accordance with paragraph 1 creates an imbalance between the rights and obligations under this Protocol, the Union or the United Kingdom, as the case may be, may take such proportionate rebalancing measures as are strictly necessary to remedy the imbalance. Priority shall be given to such measures as will least disturb the functioning of this Protocol.
3. Safeguard and rebalancing measures taken in accordance with paragraphs 1 and 2 shall be governed by the procedures set out in Annex 10 to this Protocol.
& /en 329 ARTICLE 19
Protection of financial interests
The Union and the United Kingdom shall counter fraud and any other illegal activities affecting the financial interests of the Union or of the United Kingdom.
ARTICLE 20
Review
If at any time after the end of the transition period the Union or the United Kingdom considers that this Protocol is, in whole or in part, no longer necessary to achieve the objectives set out in Article 1(3) and should cease to apply, in whole or in part, it may notify the other party, setting out its reasons.
Within 6 months of such a notification, the Joint Committee shall meet at ministerial level to consider the notification, having regard to all of the objectives specified in Article 1. The Joint Committee may seek an opinion from institutions created by the 1998 Agreement.
& /en 330 If, following the consideration referred to above, and acting in full respect of Article 5 of the Withdrawal Agreement, the Union and the United Kingdom decide jointly within the Joint Committee that the Protocol, in whole or in part, is no longer necessary to achieve its objectives, the Protocol shall cease to apply, in whole or in part. In such a case the Joint Committee shall address recommendations to the Union and to the United Kingdom on the necessary measures, taking into account the obligations of the parties to the 1998 Agreement.
ARTICLE 21
Annexes
Annexes 1 to 10 shall form an integral part of this Protocol.
& /en 331 ANNEX 1
PROVISIONS OF UNION LAW REFERRED TO IN ARTICLE 4(1)
Council Directive 2004/113/EC of 13 December 2004 implementing the principle of equal treatment between men and women in the access to and supply of goods and services
Directive 2006/54/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 5 July 2006 on the implementation of the principle of equal opportunities and equal treatment of men and women in matters of employment and occupation
Council Directive 2000/43/EC of 29 June 2000 implementing the principle of equal treatment between persons irrespective of racial or ethnic origin
Council Directive 2000/78/EC of 27 November 2000 establishing a general framework for equal treatment in employment and occupation

OJ L 373, 21.12.2004, p. 37
2 OJ L 204, 26.7.2006, p. 23
3 OJ L 180, 19.7.2000, p. 22
4 OJ L 303, 2.12.2000, p. 16
& /en 332  Directive 2010/41/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 7 July 2010 on the application of the principle of equal treatment between men and women engaged in an activity in a self-employed capacity and repealing Council Directive 86/613/EEC
Council Directive 79/7/EEC of 19 December 1978 on the progressive implementation of the principle of equal treatment for men and women in matters of social security
________________
OJ L 180, 15.7.2010, p. 1
2 OJ L 6, 10.1.1979, p. 24
& /en 333 ANNEX 2
ARTICLE
Scope
1. Subject to the conditions laid down in Article 6(1) of the Protocol, this Annex shall apply to all goods:
(a) produced in the customs territory of the Union or the United Kingdom customs territory, including those wholly or partially obtained or produced from products coming from third countries which are in free circulation in the customs territory of the Union or the United Kingdom customs territory; or
(b) coming from third countries and in free circulation in the customs territory of the Union or the United Kingdom customs territory;
(c) obtained or produced in the customs territory of the Union or the United Kingdom customs territory, in the manufacture of which products coming from third countries and not in free circulation either in the customs territory of the Union or the United Kingdom customs territory were used, under the condition that the import formalities have been complied with and any customs duties or charges having an equivalent effect which are payable on those goods or on the third-country products used in their manufacture have been levied in the exporting part of the single customs territory.
& /en 334 The term "wholly obtained" in point (a) shall have the same meaning in the United Kingdom customs territory as it does in the customs territory of the Union.
2. Goods from third countries shall be considered to be in free circulation in the customs territory of the Union or the United Kingdom customs territory if the import formalities have been complied with and any customs duties or charges having equivalent effect which are payable have been levied by the Union or by the United Kingdom in their respective part of the single customs territory, and if they have not benefitted from a total or partial reimbursement of such duties or charges.
3. As regards goods obtained or produced in the customs territory of the Union or the United Kingdom customs territory, in the manufacture of which products coming from third countries and not in free circulation either in the customs territory of the Union or the United Kingdom customs territory were used, but which are not covered by point (c) of paragraph 1, the importing part of the single customs territory shall apply the customs legislation applying to goods from third countries.
ARTICLE
Trade between the parts of the single customs territory
1. Customs duties on imports and exports, and any charges having equivalent effect, shall be prohibited between the parts of the single customs territory. This prohibition shall also apply to customs duties of a fiscal nature.
& /en 335 Charges for the performance of customs controls or any other application of the customs legislation between the parts of the single customs territory shall be considered having equivalent effect to customs duties. Charges may however be imposed or costs recovered where specific services are rendered by the customs authorities, in particular the following:
(a) attendance, where requested, by customs staff outside official office hours or at premises other than customs premises;
(b) analyses or expert reports on goods and postal fees for the return of goods to an applicant, particularly in respect of decisions taken or information provided upon application;
(c) the examination or sampling of goods for verification purposes, or the destruction of goods, where costs other than the cost of using customs staff are involved;
(d) exceptional control measures, where these are necessary due to the nature of the goods or to a potential risk.
2. Articles III, V and Article XI of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994 ("GATT 1994") shall be incorporated into and be made part of this Protocol and shall apply between the parts of the single customs territory mutatis mutandis
& /en 336 3. The rules set out in this Annex shall not preclude prohibitions or restrictions on imports, exports or goods in transit justified on grounds of public morality, public policy or public security, the protection of health and life of humans, animals or plants, the protection of national treasures possessing artistic, historic or archaeological value, the protection of industrial or commercial property. Such prohibitions or restrictions shall not, however, constitute a means of arbitrary discrimination or a disguised restriction on trade between the parts of the single customs territory
4. Nothing in this Annex shall be construed:
(a) to require the Union or the United Kingdom to furnish or allow access to any information the disclosure of which it considers contrary to its essential security interests; or
(b) to prevent the Union or the United Kingdom from taking any action which it considers necessary for the protection of its essential security interests:
(i) connected with the production of or trade in arms, munitions or war material or relating to such production of or trade in other goods and materials as is carried out directly or indirectly for the purpose of provisioning a military establishment;
(ii) relating to fissionable and fusionable materials or the materials from which they are derived; or
(iii) taken in time of war or other emergency in international relations; or
& /en 337 (c) to prevent the Union or the United Kingdom from taking any action for the purpose of maintaining international peace and security.
ARTICLE
Customs Tariff applicable to trade with third countries
1. The United Kingdom shall align the tariffs and rules applicable in its customs territory with:
(a) the Union's Common Customs Tariff, as set out in Article 56(2) of Regulation (EU) 952/2013;
(b) the Union's rules on the origin of goods, as set out in Chapter 2 of Title II of Regulation (EU) 952/2013; and
(c) the Union's rules on the value of goods for customs purposes, as set out in Chapter 3 of Title II of Regulation (EU) 952/2013.
2. Under no circumstances may the United Kingdom:
(a) apply to its customs territory a customs tariff which is lower than the Common Customs Tariff for any good or import from any third country; or
& /en 338 (b) apply or grant in its customs territory tariff preferences to any good on the basis of rules of origin that are different from those governing the granting of such preferences to the same good by the Union in its customs territory.
3. The United Kingdom may not, without prior agreement in the Joint Committee, apply or grant in its customs territory any quotas, tariff-rate quotas or duty suspensions.
4. The United Kingdom shall be informed of any decision taken by the Union to amend the Common Customs Tariff, to suspend or reintroduce duties and any decision concerning quotas, tariff-rate quotas or duty suspensions in sufficient time for it to align itself with that decision. If necessary, consultations may be held in the Joint Committee.
ARTICLE
Commercial policy
1. The single customs territory shall comply with the relevant provisions of Article XXIV of the GATT 1994. To this end, the United Kingdom shall harmonise the commercial policy applicable to its customs territory with the common commercial policy of the Union to the extent necessary to give effect to Article 6(1) of the Protocol and Article 3 of this Annex, and by applying regulations of commerce other than duties, in particular measures falling under Article XI:1 of the GATT 1994, which are substantially the same as those of the Union.
& /en 339 2. The United Kingdom shall ensure that, for the products covered by Article 6(1) of the Protocol, its Schedules of Concessions referred to in Article II of the GATT 1994 are fully aligned with those of the Union, and commitments on tariff-rate quotas are compatible with those of the Union and comply with the provisions of Article 3 of this Annex. The Union and the United Kingdom agree to cooperate on WTO matters on the apportionment of WTO tariff-rate quotas and to the extent necessary for the functioning of the single customs territory.
3. The Union's trade defence regime, as well as the Union's Generalised Scheme of Preferences ("GSP"), shall cover both parts of the single customs territory. The Union shall consult the United Kingdom on any trade defence measures or actions under the GSP regime which it considers taking. At least 6 months before the end of the transition period, the Joint Committee shall set up the procedures for the application of this paragraph.
ARTICLE
Administrative cooperation
1. In addition to the specific cooperation provided for in Annex 3 to this Protocol, the administrative authorities of the Union, including its Member States, and of the United Kingdom responsible for implementing the provisions of this Annex shall provide each other with mutual administrative assistance so as to ensure compliance with those provisions for trade in goods between the parts of the single customs territory or with third countries.
& /en 340 2. At least 6 months before the end of the transition period, the Joint Committee shall elaborate the appropriate provisions on mutual administrative assistance referred to in paragraph 1, including as regards the recovery of debts.
ARTICLE
Specific remedies
1. By way of derogation from Articles 170 to 179 of the Withdrawal Agreement, Article 6(1) of the Protocol and Article 2 of this Annex, in case of non-compliance by the United Kingdom with the obligations set out in Articles 1, 3 and 4 of this Annex with respect to goods and products from third countries, the Union may, where it considers this necessary to protect the integrity of the single market, impose tariffs or other restrictions on the movement of the relevant goods into or out of the customs territory of the Union. These goods shall not be considered as being within the scope of this Annex, as set out in Article 1(1).
2. Where the Union has made a finding, based on objective information, of the existence of an error in the United Kingdom customs territory in the implementation of Annex 3, where this error leads to consequences in terms of import duties, the Union shall request the Joint Committee to determine the appropriate measures with a view to resolving the situation.
3. Part Six of the Withdrawal Agreement shall apply to any dispute relating to the application of this Article.
________________
& /en 341 ANNEX 3
ARTICLE
Application of Customs Codes
Without prejudice to the provisions set out in Annex 2, the Union Customs Code and any other measures and controls which are applicable in the customs territory of the Union, and the United Kingdom Taxation (Cross-border Trade) Act 2018 and its implementing provisions, as well as other relevant legislation, which are applicable in the customs territory of the United Kingdom, shall apply in trade in goods between the two parts of the single customs territory under the conditions laid down in this Protocol and this Annex.
ARTICLE
Formalities in respect of point (c) of Article 1(1) of Annex 2
1. For the implementation of point (c) of Article 1(1) of Annex 2, the import formalities shall be considered as having been complied with in the exporting part of the single customs territory by the validation of the document necessary to prove that a good is within the scope of Annex 2, as set out in Article 1(1) thereof.
& /en 342 2. The validation referred to in paragraph 1 shall cause the customs duties or charges having equivalent effect, which are payable on the goods concerned or on the third-country products used in their manufacture in accordance with Article 3 of Annex 2, to be levied in the exporting part of the single customs territory. It shall also give rise to the application of the commercial policy measures described in Article 4 of Annex 2 and to which the goods may be subject.
3. The moment when the customs duties or charges having equivalent effect referred to in paragraph 2 shall be levied, shall be deemed to be the moment when the competent customs authorities accept the export declaration relating to the goods in question.
4. The debtor shall be the declarant. In the event of indirect representation, the person on whose behalf the declaration is made shall also be a debtor.
ARTICLE
Documentary evidence
Without prejudice to Article 5, proof that a good is within the scope of Annex 2 to this Protocol, as set out in Article 1(1) thereof, shall be provided by documentary evidence issued at the exporter's request by the customs authorities in the parts of the single customs territory.
& /en 343 ARTICLE
A. UK
Movement certificate
1. The documentary evidence referred to in Article 3 shall be the A. UK. movement certificate. The Union shall draw up the specimen of the A. UK. movement certificate and explanatory notes and inform the Joint Committee thereof. The use of that specimen shall be mandatory.
2. The A. UK. Movement certificate may be used only where:
(a) the goods have not
after exportation and prior to being declared for importation, been altered, transformed in any way or subjected to operations other than to preserve them in good condition or than adding or affixing marks, labels, seals or any other documentation to ensure compliance with specific domestic requirements of the importing part of the single customs territory;
(b) the goods have been stored or exhibited in a third country provided that the goods remain under customs supervision in that third country.
3. Without prejudice to paragraph 2, the splitting of consignments may take place in a third country if it is carried out by the exporter or under its responsibility and provided that they remain under customs supervision in that third country.
& /en 344 4. Paragraph 2 shall be considered to be complied with unless the customs authorities in the importing part of the single customs territory have reason to believe the contrary. In such cases, the customs authorities may request the declarant to provide evidence of compliance, which may be given by any means
5. An A. UK. movement certificate shall be endorsed by the customs authorities in the exporting part of the single customs territory when goods to which it relates are exported. It shall be made available to the exporter as soon as the actual exportation has been effected or ensured.
6. An A. UK. movement certificate may be endorsed only where it can serve as the documentary evidence required for the purpose of determining that a good is within the scope of Annex 2, as set out in Article 1(1) thereof.
7. The exporter applying for the issue of an A. UK. movement certificate shall be prepared to submit at any time, at the request of the customs authorities in the exporting part of the single customs territory where the A. UK. movement certificate is issued, all appropriate documents proving the status of the products concerned as well as the fulfilment of the other requirements of the Protocol and of Annex 2 to this Protocol.
& /en 345 8. The issuing customs authorities shall take any steps necessary to verify the status of the products and the fulfilment of the other requirements of the Protocol and of this Annex. For this purpose, they shall have the right to call for any reasonable evidence and to carry out any control considered appropriate. The issuing customs authorities shall also ensure that the certificates are duly completed. In particular, they shall check whether the space reserved for the description of the products has been completed in such a manner as to exclude all possibility of fraudulent additions.
9. An A. UK. movement certificate must be submitted, within four months of the date of issue by the customs authorities in the exporting part of the single customs territory, to the customs authorities in the importing part of the single customs territory.
10. A. UK. movement certificates submitted to the customs authorities in the importing part of the single customs territory after the final date for presentation specified in paragraph 9 may be accepted where the failure to submit these documents by the final date set is due to exceptional circumstances.
11. In other cases of belated presentation, the customs authorities in the importing part of the single customs territory shall accept A. UK. movement certificates where the related goods were presented to those authorities before the said final date.
& /en 346 ARTICLE
A. UK
movement certificates issued retrospectively
1. Notwithstanding Article 4(5), A. UK. movement certificates may exceptionally be issued after the actual exportation has been effected or ensured of the goods to which it relates if:
(a) it was not issued at the time of exportation because of errors or involuntary omissions or special circumstances; or
(b) it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the customs authorities that an A. UK
movement certificate was issued but was not accepted at importation for technical reasons.
2. For the implementation of paragraph 1, the exporter must indicate in his application the place and date of exportation of the products to which the A. UK. movement certificate relates, and state the reasons for his request.
3. The customs authorities may issue an A. UK. movement certificate retrospectively only where the customs authorities are satisfied a certificate has been applied for in accordance with the provisions of this Article.
& /en 347 ARTICLE
Submission of A. UK
movement certificates
1. Movement certificates shall be submitted to customs authorities in the importing part of the single customs territory in accordance with the procedures laid down in that part of the single customs territory. These authorities may require a translation of a certificate. They may also require the import declaration to be accompanied by a statement from the importer to the effect that the goods are within the scope of Annex 2 to this Protocol, as set out in Article 1(1) thereof.
2. The discovery of slight discrepancies between the statements made in the A.UK. movement certificates and those made in the document submitted to the customs authorities for the purpose of carrying out the import formalities for the goods shall not ipso facto render the certificates null and void if it is duly established that the certificates correspond to the goods presented.
3. Obvious formal errors such as typing errors on A. UK. movement certificates should not cause these certificates to be rejected if these errors are not such as to create doubts concerning the correctness of the statements made in these certificates.
& /en 348 ARTICLE
Replacement of A. UK
movement certificates
When goods are placed under the control of a customs office in either part of the single customs territory, it shall be possible to replace the original A. UK. movement certificate by one or more A. UK. movement certificates for the purpose of sending all or some of these goods elsewhere within the single customs territory. The replacement A. UK. movement certificate(s) shall be issued by the customs office under whose control the products are placed.
ARTICLE
Administrative cooperation
1. The customs authorities of the Member States of the Union and of United Kingdom shall provide each other, through the European Commission, with specimen impressions of stamps used in their customs offices for the issue of A. UK. movement certificates and with the addresses of the customs authorities responsible for verifying those certificates.
2. In order to ensure the proper application of this Protocol, the Union and United Kingdom shall assist each other, through the competent customs administrations, in checking the authenticity of A. UK. movement certificates and the correctness of the information given in them.
& /en 349 ARTICLE
Verification of A. UK
movement certificate
1. Subsequent verifications of A. UK. movement certificates shall be carried out at random or whenever the customs authorities in the importing part of the single customs territory have reasonable doubts as to the authenticity of the certificates, the status of the products concerned or the fulfilment of the other requirements of the Protocol and of its Annexes
providing such verification is sought no later than 3 years after the issuing of the A. UK. movement certificate by the customs authorities in the exporting part of the single customs territory.
2. For the purposes of implementing the provisions of paragraph 1, the customs authorities in the importing part of the single customs territory shall send the A. UK. movement certificate to the customs authorities in the exporting part of the single customs territory, and the invoice, if it has been submitted, or a copy of these documents, giving, where appropriate, the reasons for the enquiry. Any documents and information obtained suggesting that the information given on the A.UK movement certificate is incorrect shall be forwarded in support of the request for verification.
3. The verification shall be carried out by the customs authorities in the exporting part of the single customs territory. For this purpose, they shall have the right to call for any reasonable evidence and to carry out any inspection of the exporter's accounts or any other check considered appropriate.
& /en 350 4. If the customs authorities in the importing part of the single customs territory decide to refuse for the products concerned, the treatment provided for in Annex 2 while awaiting the results of the verification, release of the products shall be offered to the importer subject to any precautionary measures judged necessary.
5. The customs authorities requesting the verification shall be informed of the results of this verification within a maximum of 10 months. These results must indicate clearly whether the documents are authentic and whether the products concerned were within the scope of Annex 2 to this Protocol, as set out in Article 1(1) thereof, and fulfil the other requirements of the Protocol and its Annexes.
6. If, in cases of reasonable doubt, there is no reply within 10 months or if the reply does not contain sufficient information to determine the authenticity of the document in question or the true status of the product, the requesting customs authorities shall, except in exceptional circumstances, refuse the treatment provided for in the Protocol and its Annexes.
ARTICLE 10
Disputes relating to the verification procedure
1. Where disputes arise in relation to the verification procedures of Article 9 which cannot be settled between the customs authorities requesting a verification and the customs authorities responsible for carrying out this verification, or where they raise a question as to the interpretation of this Annex, they shall be submitted to the Joint Committee.
& /en 351 2. At the request of the Union or the United Kingdom, consultations shall be hold in the Joint Committee within a period of 90 days from the date of submission referred to in paragraph 1, with a view to resolving those differences. The period for consultation may be extended on a case by case basis by mutual written agreement. After this period the customs authority of the importing part of the single customs territory can make its decision on the status of the goods concerned.
3. In all cases, disputes between the importer and the customs authorities of the importing country shall be settled under the legislation of the said country.
ARTICLE 11
Penalties
Penalties shall be imposed on any person who draws up, or causes to be drawn up, a document which contains incorrect information for the purpose of obtaining the treatment provided for in the Protocol and Annex 2 to this Protocol. Such penalties shall be effective, proportionate and dissuasive.
& /en 352 ARTICLE 12
Provisions concerning the goods brought by travellers
Provided that they are not intended for commercial use, goods brought by travellers from one part of the single customs territory to the other part of the single customs territory shall benefit from the treatment provided for in Annex 2 without being the subject of the certificate provided for in Articles 3 to 11 when they are declared as goods within the scope of Annex 2, as set out in Article 1(1) thereof, and there is no doubt as to the accuracy of the declaration.
The Joint Committee shall regularly discuss the implementation of this Article, and where appropriate, adopt the necessary measures for its proper application.
ARTICLE 13
Postal consignments
Postal consignments (including postal packages) shall benefit from the treatment provided for in Annex 2 without being the subject of the certificate provided for in Articles 3 to 11, provided there is no indication on the packing or on the accompanying documents that the goods contained therein are not within the scope of Annex 2 to this Protocol, as set out in Article 1(1) thereof. This indication consists of a label to be affixed in all cases of this kind by the competent authorities of the exporting part of the single customs territory.
& /en 353 The Union shall draw up the specimen of the label referred to in the first subparagraph and inform the Joint Committee thereof. The use of the label based on that specimen shall be mandatory.
The Joint Committee shall regularly discuss the implementation of this Article, and where appropriate, adopt the necessary measures for its proper application.
________________
& /en 354 ANNEX 4
PART ONE
TAXATION
ARTICLE
Taxation
1. The Union and the United Kingdom recognise and commit themselves to implementing the principles of good governance in the area of taxation, including the global standards on transparency and exchange of information, fair taxation, and the OECD standards against Base Erosion and Profit Shifting (BEPS). The Union and the United Kingdom will promote good governance in tax matters, improve international cooperation in the tax area and facilitate the collection of tax revenues.
2. In the context of the Union's and the United Kingdom's commitments set out in paragraph 1, the United Kingdom shall continue to apply provisions of its domestic law transposing the following provisions of Union law, as applicable at the end of the transition period:
(a) Council Directive 2011/16/EU of 15 February 2011 on administrative cooperation in the field of taxation and repealing Directive 77/799/EEC;
& /en 355 (b) Council Directive (EU) 2016/1164 of 12 July 2016 laying down rules against tax avoidance practices that directly affect the functioning of the internal market; and
(c) Article 89 of Directive 2013/36/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 June 2013 on access to the activity of credit institutions and the prudential supervision of credit institutions and investment firms, amending Directive 2002/87/EC and repealing Directives 2006/48/EC and 2006/49/EC.
3. The Union and the United Kingdom, reflecting the direction set by the G20-OECD BEPS Action Plan, reaffirm their commitment to curb harmful tax measures.
In this context, the United Kingdom reaffirms its commitment to the Code of Conduct for business taxation set out in the conclusions of the Council of Ministers of 1st December 1997 as reflected in the mandate and criteria established by those conclusions, as well as the guidance relating to the Code of Conduct, as applicable at the end of the transition period.
4. The Joint Committee may determine the measures necessary for the implementation of paragraph 2 and shall discuss all matters related to the implementation of paragraph 3.
5. Articles 170 to 181 of the Withdrawal Agreement shall not apply in respect of disputes regarding the interpretation and application of paragraph
1, 3 and 4 of this Article.
& /en 356 PART TWO
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
ARTICLE
Non-regression in the level of environmental protection
1. With the aim of ensuring the proper functioning of the single customs territory, the Union and the United Kingdom shall ensure that the level of environmental protection provided by law, regulations and practices is not reduced below the level provided by the common standards applicable within the Union and the United Kingdom at the end of the transition period in relation to: access to environmental information, public participation and access to justice in environmental matters; environmental impact assessment and strategic environmental assessment; industrial emissions; air emissions and air quality targets and ceilings; nature and biodiversity conservation; waste management; the protection and preservation of the aquatic environment; the protection and preservation of the marine environment; the prevention, reduction and elimination of risks to human health or the environment arising from the production, use, release and disposal of chemical substances; and climate change.
& /en 357 2. Reflecting their common principles at the end of the transition period and their commitment to the 1992 Rio Declaration on Environment and Development, in giving effect to the obligations set out in this Article the Union and the United Kingdom shall respect the following principles in their respective environmental legislation:
(a) the precautionary principle;
(b) the principle that preventive action should be taken;
(c) the principle that environmental damage should as a priority be rectified at source; and
(d) the "polluter pays" principle.
3. Having regard to the common standards referred to in paragraph 1, the Joint Committee shall adopt decisions laying down minimum commitments for:
(a)
he reduction of national emissions of certain atmospheric pollutants;
(b) the maximum sulphur content of marine fuels which may be used in the territorial seas, exclusive economic zones, including in the SOx-Emission Control Area (SOx-ECA) designated in the North Sea and Baltic Sea area, and in the ports of the Member States of the Union and of the United Kingdom; and
& /en 358 (c) those best available techniques, including emission limit values, in relation to industrial emissions.
These decisions shall apply as from the end of the transition period.
4. The Union and the United Kingdom shall take the necessary measures to meet their respective commitments to international agreements to address climate change, including those which implement the United Nations Framework Conventions on Climate Change, such as the Paris Agreement of 2015
5. The United Kingdom shall implement a system of carbon pricing of at least the same effectiveness and scope as that provided by Directive 2003/87/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 October 2003 establishing a scheme for greenhouse gas emission allowance trading within the Community.
6. The Union and the United Kingdom reaffirm their commitment to implement effectively the multilateral environmental agreements to which they are party in their laws, regulations and practice

7. Articles 170 to 181 of the Withdrawal Agreement shall not apply in respect of disputes regarding the interpretation and application of this Article.
& /en 359 ARTICLE
Monitoring and enforcement related to environmental protection
1. Noting that within the Union the effective application of Union law reflecting the common standards referred to in Article 2(1) is ensured by the Commission and the Court of Justice of the European Union acting under the Treaties, the United Kingdom shall ensure effective enforcement of Article 2 and of its laws, regulations and practices reflecting those common standards, without prejudice to Article 2(7).
The United Kingdom shall ensure that administrative and judicial proceedings are available in order to permit effective and timely action by public authorities and members of the public against violations of its laws, regulations and practices, and provide for effective remedies, including interim measures, ensuring that any sanctions are effective, proportionate and dissuasive and have a real and deterrent effect.
2. The United Kingdom shall implement a transparent system for the effective domestic monitoring, reporting, oversight and enforcement of its obligations pursuant to this Article and to Article 2 by an independent and adequately resourced body or bodies ("the independent body").
& /en 360 The independent body shall have powers to conduct inquiries on its own initiative concerning alleged breaches by public bodies and authorities of the United Kingdom, and to receive complaints for the purposes of conducting such inquiries. It shall have all powers necessary to carry out its functions, including the power to request information. The independent body shall have the right to bring a legal action before a competent court or tribunal in the United Kingdom in an appropriate judicial procedure, with a view to seeking an adequate remedy.
PART THREE
LABOUR AND SOCIAL STANDARDS
ARTICLE
Non-regression of labour and social standards
1. With the aim of ensuring the proper functioning of the single customs territory, the Union and the United Kingdom shall ensure that the level of protection provided for by law, regulations and practices is not reduced below the level provided by the common standards applicable within the Union and the United Kingdom at the end of the transition period in the area of labour and social protection and as regards fundamental rights at work, occupational health and safety, fair working conditions and employment standards, information and consultation rights at company level, and restructuring.
& /en 361 2. Articles 170 to 181 of the Withdrawal Agreement shall not apply in respect of disputes regarding the interpretation and application of this Article.
ARTICLE
Multilateral labour and social standards and agreements
1. Taking into account the importance of international cooperation and agreements on labour affairs and of high levels of labour and social protection coupled with their effective protection, the Union and the United Kingdom shall protect and promote social dialogue on labour matters among workers and employers, and their respective organisations, and governments.
2. The Union and the United Kingdom reaffirm their commitment to implement effectively in their laws, regulations and practices the International Labour Organisation Conventions, and the provisions of the Council of Europe European Social Charter, as ratified and accepted by the United Kingdom and the Member States of the Union respectively.
3. The Union and the United Kingdom shall exchange information on the respective situations and advances of the Member States and of the United Kingdom regarding the ratification of International Labour Organisation Conventions that are classified as up to date by the International Labour Organisation and of the revised European Social Charter and related Protocols.
& /en 362 4. Articles 170 to 181 of the Withdrawal Agreement shall not apply in respect of disputes regarding the interpretation and application of this Article.
ARTICLE
Monitoring and enforcement of labour and social standards
Noting that within the Union the effective application of Union law reflecting the common standards referred to in Article 4(1) is ensured by the Commission and the Court of Justice of the European Union acting under the Treaties, the United Kingdom shall ensure effective enforcement of Article 4 and of its laws, regulations and practices reflecting those common standards in its whole territory, without prejudice to Article 4(2).
The United Kingdom shall maintain an effective system of labour inspections, ensure that administrative and judicial proceedings are available in order to permit effective action against violations of its laws, regulations and practices, and provide for effective remedies, ensuring that any sanctions are effective, proportionate and dissuasive and have a real and deterrent effect.
& /en 363 PART FOUR
STATE AID
ARTICLE
State aid
1. With a view to preserving a robust and comprehensive framework for State aid control that prevents undue distortions of trade and competition, the Union State aid law provisions listed in Annex 8 to this Protocol shall apply to the United Kingdom, in respect of measures which affect that trade between the parts of the single customs territory which is subject to Annex 2. However, in respect of such measures of the United Kingdom authorities, references to the European Commission in those Union law provisions shall be read as referring to the independent authority referred to in Article 9.
2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1, the provisions of Union law referred to in that paragraph shall not apply with respect to measures of the United Kingdom authorities supporting the production of and trade in agricultural products in the United Kingdom customs territory up to a determined maximum overall annual level of support, and provided that a determined minimum percentage of that exempted support complies with the provisions of Annex 2 to the WTO Agreement on Agriculture. The determination of the maximum exempted overall annual level of support and the minimum percentage shall be set by the Joint Committee and governed by the procedures set out in Article 8.
& /en 364 3. This Article is without prejudice to Article 12 of the Protocol and to Article 14(4) and (5) of the Protocol as regards Article 12 of the Protocol.
ARTICLE
Procedures referred to in Article 7(2)
The Joint Committee shall determine the initial maximum exempted overall annual level of support and the initial minimum percentage referred to in Article 7(2), taking into account the most recent information available. The initial maximum exempted overall annual level of support shall be informed by the design of the United Kingdom's future agricultural support scheme as well as by the annual average of the total amount of expenditure incurred in the United Kingdom customs territory under the Common Agricultural Policy under the current MFF 2014-2020. The initial minimum percentage shall be informed by the design of the United Kingdom's agricultural support scheme as well as by the percentage to which the overall expenditure under the Common Agricultural Policy in the Union complied with the provisions of Annex 2 to the WTO Agreement on Agriculture as notified for the period concerned.
The Joint Committee shall adjust the level of support and percentage referred to in the first subparagraph informed by the design of the United Kingdom's agricultural support scheme to any variation in the overall amount of support available under the Common Agricultural Policy in the Union in each future Multiannual Financial Framework.
& /en 365 If the Joint Committee fails to determine the initial level of support and percentage in accordance with the first subparagraph, or fails to adjust the level of support and percentage in accordance with the second subparagraph, by the end of the transition period or within one year of the entry into force of a future Multiannual Financial Framework, as the case may be, application of Article 7(2) shall be suspended until the Joint Committee has determined or adjusted the level of support and percentage.
ARTICLE
Independent authority
1. The United Kingdom shall establish or maintain an operationally independent authority ("the independent authority"). In performing its duties and exercising its powers, the independent authority shall have the necessary guarantees of independence from political or other external influence and shall act impartially.
2. In respect of measures of the United Kingdom authorities that are subject to Article 7(1), the independent authority shall have powers and functions equivalent to those of the European Commission acting under the Union State aid law provisions listed in Annex 8 to this Protocol. The independent authority shall be appropriately equipped with the resources necessary for the full application and the effective enforcement, in accordance with Article 7(1), of the Union State aid law provisions listed in Annex 8 to this Protocol. These resources include human, technical and financial resources, premises and infrastructure.
& /en 366 3. Decisions of the independent authority shall produce in respect of and in the United Kingdom the same legal effects as those which comparable decisions of the European Commission acting under the Union State aid law provisions listed in Annex 8 to this Protocol produce within the Union and its Member States.
ARTICLE 10
Cooperation
1. With a view to ensuring consistent surveillance in the field of State aid throughout the single customs territory, the European Commission and the independent authority shall cooperate.
2. The European Commission and the independent authority shall:
(a) exchange information and views on the implementation, application and interpretation of the Union State aid law provisions listed in Annex 8, and
(b) provide on a case-by-case basis information and exchange views on individual State aid cases which affect that trade between the parts of the single customs territory which is subject to Annex 2. The European Commission and the independent authority shall exchange this information taking into account the limitations imposed by the requirements of professional and business secrecy.
& /en 367 3. If the independent authority decides to open the procedure referred to in the first and second subparagraphs of Article 108(2) of the TFEU in respect of measures of the United Kingdom authorities that are subject to Article 7(1), the independent authority shall communicate that decision to the European Commission and give it the opportunity to submit its comments in accordance with the applicable time limits in Regulation (EU) 2015/1589.
4. The independent authority shall consult the European Commission on all draft decisions it intends to adopt in accordance with Articles 7(1) and 9. The European Commission shall have up to 3 months to communicate its opinion, and the independent authority shall take utmost account of that opinion before adopting the decision. In cases of urgency, the independent authority may invite the Commission to communicate its opinion as soon as possible.
Where the European Commission considers, during the period referred to in the first subparagraph, that it requires further information before it can formulate its opinion, it may address a request for additional information to the independent authority. That period shall be suspended from the date of the European Commission's request, and shall start afresh from the date of receipt of the independent authority's response.
The independent authority shall not adopt the draft decision until the European Commission has communicated its opinion in accordance with the first subparagraph.
& /en 368 ARTICLE 11
Courts and tribunals of the United Kingdom
1. Noting that the Court of Justice of the European Union has jurisdiction under the Treaties in respect of acts of the European Commission in the area of State aid, in respect of measures of the United Kingdom authorities that are subject to Article 7(1), the United Kingdom shall ensure that courts or tribunals in the United Kingdom are competent to:
(a) review and enforce compliance by the United Kingdom's authorities with the obligation under Article 108(3) of the TFEU to notify and not to put a proposed measure in effect until the independent authority has authorised it
(b) review the compliance of the decisions taken by the independent authority with the Union State aid law provisions listed in Annex 8;
(c) review and enforce compliance with a decision of the independent authority by the United Kingdom's authorities, and impose penalties in case of non-compliance;
(d) decide on actions for a failure of the independent authority to act, and order the independent authority to act; and
(e) decide on actions for private damages and award such damages.
& /en 369 2. The European Commission and interested parties shall have legal standing before courts or tribunals in the United Kingdom to bring such cases.
The term "interested parties" in the first subparagraph shall have the same meaning as it does under Union State aid law provisions listed in Annex 8
3. The European Commission shall have the right to intervene in cases referred to in paragraph 1 brought before courts or tribunals in the United Kingdom by the independent authority or any interested party.
ARTICLE 12
Transparency
Without prejudice to the Union State aid law provisions listed in Annex 8, the United Kingdom shall maintain a system of transparency of aid granted for individual State aid grants above EUR 500 000.
& /en 370 ARTICLE 13
Consultations
1. If the Union considers that the application or implementation by the United Kingdom of Article 7 and Articles 9 to 12 threatens to seriously undermine the equal conditions of competition between the parts of the single customs territory, it may request a consultation within the Joint Committee with a view to finding a commonly acceptable solution.
2. The consultation shall take place on the basis of a written request that includes an explanation of the Union's reasons for requesting the consultation. A meeting of the Joint Committee shall be held within 30 days of the request.
3. If a commonly agreed solution has not been found in the Joint Committee within 30 days of the meeting of the Joint Committee referred to in paragraph 2, the Union may adopt interim measures in accordance with Article 14.
& /en 371 ARTICLE 14
Interim measures
1. The Union shall be entitled, after giving notice to the United Kingdom, to take appropriate remedial measures:
(a) in accordance with Article 13(3); or
(b) where the Union considers that the United Kingdom has failed to comply with its obligations under Article 7 and Articles 9 to 12 and the Union has commenced consultation in the Joint Committee in accordance with Article 169 of the Withdrawal Agreement, provided that the Union considers that the United Kingdom's failure to comply threatens to undermine the equal conditions of competition between the parts of the single customs territory;
2. In the case referred to in point (b) of paragraph 1, the appropriate remedial measures taken by the Union may take effect at the earliest 30 days after the Union has given the United Kingdom notice.
3. The appropriate remedial measures taken by the Union shall cease to apply when:
(a) the Union is satisfied that the risk to the equal conditions of competition between the parts of the single customs territory has been remedied; or
& /en 372 (b) in cases submitted to arbitration in accordance with Article 170 of the Withdrawal Agreement, the arbitration panel has decided that the United Kingdom has not failed to comply with its obligations under Article 7 and Articles 9 to 12.
ARTICLE 15
Coordination
1. The exercise of its powers under Article 9 by the independent authority in respect of measures of the United Kingdom authorities that are subject to Article 7(1) is without prejudice to the European Commission's powers under Article 14(4) of the Protocol as regards Article 12 of the Protocol.
In particular:
(a) a decision by the independent authority shall not give rise to legitimate expectations under Union law as regards the application of Article 12 of the Protocol;
(b) where the European Commission, acting under Article 12 of the Protocol, and the independent authority, acting under Articles 7(1) and 9, take decisions concerning the same measure of the United Kingdom authorities, the decision of the independent authority is without prejudice to the legal effects in the United Kingdom of the decision of the European Commission pursuant to Article 14(5) of the Protocol.
& /en 373 2. Where the independent authority learns, by any means, of a measure by the United Kingdom authorities that may be subject to both Article 12(1) of the Protocol and Article 7(1), it may informally consult the European Commission on whether the latter considers the measure in question to be subject to Article 12(1).
PART FIVE
COMPETITION
ARTICLE 16
Principles
The Union and the United Kingdom recognise the importance of free and undistorted competition in their trade and investment relations. The Union and the United Kingdom acknowledge that anti-competitive business practices, concentrations of undertakings and State interventions have the potential to distort the proper functioning of markets and undermine the benefits of trade liberalisation.
This Part is without prejudice to the specific provisions applicable in the Union to agricultural products in accordance with Article 42 of the TFEU, and equivalent laws, regulations and practices applicable in the United Kingdom

& /en 374 ARTICLE 17
Agreements between undertakings
1. The following shall be prohibited in so far as they may affect trade between the Union and the United Kingdom: all agreements between undertakings, decisions by associations of undertakings and concerted practices which have as their object or effect the prevention, restriction or distortion of competition, and in particular those which:
(a) directly or indirectly fix purchase or selling prices or any other trading conditions;
(b) limit or control production, markets, technical development or investment;
(c) share markets or sources of supply;
(d) apply dissimilar conditions to equivalent transactions with other trading parties, thereby placing them at a competitive disadvantage;
(e) make the conclusion of contracts subject to acceptance by the other parties of supplementary obligations which, by their nature or according to commercial usage, have no connection with the subject of such contracts.
2. Any agreements or decisions prohibited pursuant to this Article shall automatically be void.
& /en 375 3. The provisions of paragraph 1 may, however, be declared inapplicable in the case of:
any agreement or category of agreements between undertakings,
any decision or category of decisions by associations of undertakings,
any concerted practice or category of concerted practices
which contributes to improving the production or distribution of goods or to promoting technical or economic progress, which allows consumers a fair share of the resulting benefit, and which does not:
(a) impose on the undertakings concerned restrictions which are not indispensable to the attainment of these objectives;
(b) afford such undertakings the possibility of eliminating competition in respect of a substantial part of the products in question.
ARTICLE 18
Abuse of a dominant position
1. Any abuse by one or more undertakings of a dominant position in the territories of the Union and the United Kingdom as a whole or in a substantial part thereof shall be prohibited, in so far as it may affect trade between the Union and the United Kingdom.
& /en 376 2. Such abuse may, in particular, consist in:
(a) directly or indirectly imposing unfair purchase or selling prices or other unfair trading conditions;
(b) limiting production, markets or technical development to the prejudice of consumers;
(c) applying dissimilar conditions to equivalent transactions with other trading parties, thereby placing them at a competitive disadvantage;
(d) making the conclusion of contracts subject to acceptance by the other parties of supplementary obligations which, by their nature or according to commercial usage, have no connection with the subject of such contracts.
ARTICLE 19
Concentrations of undertakings
Concentrations between undertakings which are notifiable to the United Kingdom or the Union or to one or more of its Member States and which threaten to significantly impede or to substantially lessen effective competition, in particular as a result of the creation or strengthening of a dominant position, shall be declared incompatible, in so far as they affect trade between the Union and the United Kingdom, unless remedies are offered to address adequately the identified competition concerns.
& /en 377 ARTICLE 20
Public undertakings, undertakings granted special or exclusive rights or privileges,  and designated monopolies
1. In the case of public undertakings and undertakings to which the Member States or the United Kingdom grant special or exclusive rights, the Union and the United Kingdom shall ensure that there are neither enacted nor maintained in force any measures contrary to the rules contained in Articles 17 to 19.
2. Undertakings entrusted with the operation of services of general economic interest or having the character of revenue-producing monopoly shall be subject to the rules contained in Articles 17 to 19, in so far as the application of those rules does not obstruct the performance, in law or in fact, of the particular tasks assigned to them. The development of trade must not be affected to such an extent as would be contrary to the interests of the Union and the United Kingdom.
& /en 378 ARTICLE 21
Interpretation
The Union and the United Kingdom shall implement and apply Articles 17 to 20, in so far as they reflect concepts of Union law, using as sources of interpretation the criteria arising from the application of Articles 101, 102 and 106 of the TFEU as well as all relevant acts adopted by the institutions, bodies, offices or agencies of the Union, including frameworks, guidelines, notices and other acts applicable in the Union.
ARTICLE 22
Implementation
1. The Union and the United Kingdom shall take all appropriate measures to ensure that their respective competition rules address in an effective manner all of the practices set out in Articles 17 to 20.
In particular, the United Kingdom shall adopt or maintain a competition law which addresses, in an effective manner, all of the practices set out in Article 17 to 20.
2. The Union and the United Kingdom shall enforce the rules referred to in the first subparagraph of paragraph 1 in their respective territories.
& /en 379 For the purposes of the first subparagraph, the United Kingdom shall establish or maintain an operationally independent authority or authorities ("the independent authority"). The independent authority shall have the necessary guarantees of independence from political or other external influence and shall be able to perform its duties and exercise its powers impartially. It shall be appropriately equipped with all the powers and resources necessary for the full application and the effective enforcement of the competition law referred to in paragraph 1.
3. The United Kingdom shall apply the competition law referred to in paragraph 1 in a transparent and non-discriminatory manner, respecting the principles of procedural fairness and rights of defence of the undertakings concerned, irrespective of their nationality or ownership status.
ARTICLE 23
Cooperation
1. In order to enhance effective competition enforcement, the Union and the United Kingdom acknowledge that it is in their common interest to promote cooperation with regard to competition policy development and the investigation of antitrust and merger cases.
2. For this purpose, the competition authorities of the Union and the United Kingdom will endeavour to coordinate, where this is possible and appropriate, their enforcement activities relating to the same or related cases.
& /en 380 3. To facilitate the cooperation referred to in paragraph 1, the competition authorities of the Union and the United Kingdom may exchange information.
4. In implementing the objectives of this Article, the Union and the United Kingdom, or the competition authorities of the Union and the United Kingdom, may enter into a separate agreement or agree upon a separate framework on cooperation between the competition authorities.
ARTICLE 24
Monitoring and dispute settlement
1. Noting that in the Union effective enforcement is ensured by the Commission and the Court of Justice acting under the Treaties, the United Kingdom shall ensure effective enforcement of the provisions in Articles 17 to 20 and shall not reduce the effectiveness of public and private enforcement of its competition laws, regulations and practices. In particular, the United Kingdom shall ensure that administrative and judicial proceedings are available in order to permit effective and timely action against violations, and provide for effective remedies, including interim measures, ensuring that any sanctions are effective, proportionate and dissuasive and have a real and deterrent effect.
2. Articles 170 to 181 of the Withdrawal Agreement shall not apply in respect of disputes regarding the interpretation and application of Article 16 to 23

& /en 381 PART SIX
STATE-OWNED UNDERTAKINGS, UNDERTAKINGS GRANTED SPECIAL RIGHTS  AND PRIVILEGES, AND DESIGNATED MONOPOLIES
ARTICLE 25
Neutral regulation
1. The Union and the United Kingdom shall respect and make best use of relevant international standards including, inter alia, the OECD Guidelines on Corporate Governance of State-Owned Undertakings.
2. Any regulatory body or function that is established or maintained in the Union or the United Kingdom shall:
(a) be independent from and not accountable to any of the undertakings that it regulates in order to ensure the effectiveness of the regulatory function, and
(b) act impartially in like circumstances with respect to all undertakings that it regulates.
3. The Union and the United Kingdom shall ensure the enforcement of laws and regulations in a consistent and non-discriminatory manner.
________________
& /en 382 ANNEX 5
PROVISIONS OF UNION LAW REFERRED TO IN ARTICLES 6(2) AND 10
1. General customs aspects
Regulation (EU) No 952/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of
October 2013 laying down the Union Customs Code
Council Regulation (EC) No 515/97 of 13 March 1997 on mutual assistance between the administrative authorities of the Member States and cooperation between the latter and the Commission to ensure the correct application of the law on customs and agricultural matters
-  Council Directive 2010/24/EU of 16 March 2010 concerning mutual assistance for the recovery of claims relating to taxes, duties and other measures

The headings and subheadings in this Annex are purely indicative.
OJ L 269, 10.10.2013, p.
.
OJ L 82, 22.3.1997, p. 1
4 OJ L 84, 31.3.2010, p. 1
& /en 383 2. Protection of the Union's financial interests
For the purpose of the application of the acts listed in this section, the proper collection of customs duties by the United Kingdom in respect of Northern Ireland shall be considered as part of the protection of the financial interests of the Union.
Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 883/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 September 2013 concerning investigations conducted by the European Anti-Fraud Office (OLAF) and repealing Regulation (EC) No 1073/1999 of the European Parliament and of the Council and Council Regulation (Euratom) No 1074/1999
Council Regulation (EC, Euratom) No 2988/95 of 18 December 1995 on the protection of the European Communities financial interests
3. Trade statistics
Regulation (EC) No 638/2004 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 31 March 2004 on Community statistics relating to the trading of goods between Member States and repealing Council Regulation (EEC) No 3330/91

OJ L 248, 18.9.2013, p. 1
2 OJ L 312, 23.12.1995, p. 1
3 OJ L 102, 7.4.2004, p. 1
& /en 384  Regulation (EC) No 471/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of
May 2009 on Community statistics relating to external trade with non-member countries and repealing Council Regulation (EC) No 1172/95
4. General trade related aspects
Regulation (EU) No 978/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 October 2012 applying a scheme of generalised tariff preferences and repealing Council Regulation (EC) No 732/2008
Regulation (EU) 2015/479 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 March 2015 on common rules for exports
Regulation (EU) 2015/936 of the European Parliament and of the Council of
June 2015 on common rules for imports of textile products from certain third countries not covered by bilateral agreements, protocols or other arrangements, or by other specific Union import rules

OJ L 152, 16.6.2009, p. 23
2 OJ L 303, 31.10.2012, p. 1
3 OJ L 83, 27.3.2015, p. 34
4 OJ L 160, 25.6.2015, p. 1
& /en 385  Regulation (EU) 2017/821 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 17 May 2017 laying down supply chain due diligence obligations for Union importers of tin, tantalum and tungsten, their ores, and gold originating from conflict-affected and high-risk areas
Council Regulation 1215/2009 of 30 November 2009 introducing exceptional trade measures for countries and territories participating in or linked to the European Union's Stabilisation and Association process (Western Balkans)
Regulation (EU) 2017/1566 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 September 2017 on the introduction of temporary autonomous trade measures for Ukraine supplementing the trade concessions available under the Association Agreement
Obligations stemming from the international agreements concluded by the Union, or by Member States acting on its behalf, or by the Union and its Member States acting jointly, in so far as they relate to trade in goods between the Union and third countries

OJ L 130, 19.5.2017, p. 1
2 OJ L 328, 15.12.2009, p. 1
3 OJ L 254, 30.9.2017, p. 1
& /en 386 5. Trade defence instruments
Regulation (EU) 2016/1036 of the European Parliament and of the Council of
June 2016 on protection against dumped imports from countries not members of the European Union
Regulation (EU) 2016/1037 of the European Parliament and of the Council of
June 2016 on protection against subsidised imports from countries not members of the European Union
Regulation (EU) 2015/478 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 March 2015 on common rules for imports
Regulation (EU) 2015/755 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 29 April 2015 on common rules for imports from certain third countries
Regulation (EU) 2015/476 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 March 2015 on the measures that the Union may take following a report adopted by the WTO Dispute Settlement Body concerning anti-dumping and anti-subsidy matters

OJ L 176, 30.6.2016, p. 21
2 OJ L 176, 30.6.2016, p. 55
3 OJ L 83, 27.3.2015, p. 16
4 OJ L 123, 19.5.2015, p. 33
5 OJ L 83, 27.3.2015, p. 6
& /en 387  Regulation (EU) 2015/477 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 March 2015 on measures that the Union may take in relation to the combined effect of anti-dumping or anti-subsidy measures with safeguard measures
6. Regulations on bilateral safeguards
Regulation (EU) No 654/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 May 2014 concerning the exercise of the Union's rights for the application and enforcement of international trade rules and amending Council Regulation (EC) No 3286/94 laying down Community procedures in the field of the common commercial policy in order to ensure the exercise of the Community's rights under international trade rules, in particular those established under the auspices of the World Trade Organization
Regulation (EU) 2015/1145 of the European Parliament and of the Council of
July 2015 on the safeguard measures provided for in the Agreement between the European Economic Community and the Swiss Confederation
Regulation (EU) 2015/475 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 March 2015 on the safeguard measures provided for in the Agreement between the European Economic Community and the Republic of Iceland

OJ L 83, 27.3.2015, p. 11
2 OJ L 189, 27.6.2014, p. 50
3 OJ L 191, 17.7.2015, p. 1
4 OJ L 83, 27.3.2015, p. 1
.
& /en 388  Regulation (EU) 2015/938 of the European Parliament and of the Council of
June 2015 on the safeguard measures provided for in the Agreement between the European Economic Community and the Kingdom of Norway
Regulation (EU) 2015/752 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 29 April 2015 on certain procedures for applying the Stabilisation and Association Agreement between the European Communities and their Member States, of the one part, and the Republic of Montenegro, of the other part
Regulation (EU) No 19/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 January 2013 implementing the bilateral safeguard clause and the stabilisation mechanism for bananas of the Trade Agreement between the European Union and its Member States, of the one part, and Colombia and Peru, of the other part
Regulation (EU) No 20/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 January 2013 implementing the bilateral safeguard clause and the stabilisation mechanism for bananas of the Agreement establishing an Association between the European Union and its Member States, on the one hand, and Central America on the other

OJ L 160, 25.6.2015, p. 57
2 OJ L 123, 19.5.2015, p. 16
3 OJ L 17, 19.1.2013, p. 1
4 OJ L 17, 19.1.2013, p. 13
& /en 389  Regulation (EU) 2016/401 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 9 March 2016 implementing the anti-circumvention mechanism provided for in the Association Agreement between the European Union and the European Atomic Energy Community and their Member States, of the one part, and Georgia, of the other part
Regulation (EU) 2016/400 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 9 March 2016 implementing the safeguard clause and the anti-circumvention mechanism provided for in the Association Agreement between the European Union and the European Atomic Energy Community and their Member States, of the one part, and the Republic of Moldova, of the other part
Regulation (EU) 2015/941 of the European Parliament and of the Council of
June 2015 on certain procedures for applying the Stabilisation and Association Agreement between the European Communities and their Member States, of the one part, and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, of the other part

OJ L 77, 23.3.2016, p. 62
2 OJ L 77, 23.3.2016, p. 53
3 OJ L 160, 25.6.2015, p. 76
& /en 390  Regulation (EU) 2015/940 of the European Parliament and of the Council of
June 2015 on certain procedures for applying the Stabilisation and Association Agreement between the European Communities and their Member States, of the one part, and Bosnia and Herzegovina, of the other part, and for applying the Interim Agreement on trade and trade-related matters between the European Community, of the one part, and Bosnia and Herzegovina, of the other part
Regulation (EU) 2015/939 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 9 June 2015 on certain procedures for applying the Stabilisation and Association Agreement between the European Communities and their Member States, of the one part, and the Republic of Albania, of the other part
Regulation (EU) No 511/2011 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 May 2011 implementing the bilateral safeguard clause of the Free Trade Agreement between the European Union and its Member States and the Republic of Korea
Regulation (EU) 2017/355 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 February 2017 on certain procedures for applying the Stabilisation and Association Agreement between the European Union and the European Atomic Energy Community, of the one part, and Kosovo* of the other part

OJ L 160, 25.6.2015, p. 69
2 OJ L 160, 25.6.2015, p. 62
3 OJ L 145, 31.5.2011, p. 19
4 OJ L 57, 3.3.2017, p. 59
& /en 391  Regulation (EU) 2016/1076 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 8 June 2016 applying the arrangements for products originating in certain states which are part of the African, Caribbean and Pacific (ACP) Group of States provided for in agreements establishing, or leading to the establishment of, economic partnership agreements
7. Others
Regulation (EC) No 816/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 17 May 2006 on compulsory licensing of patents relating to the manufacture of pharmaceutical products for export to countries with public health problems
8. Goods
general provisions
Directive (EU) 2015/1535 of the European Parliament and of the Council of
September 2015 laying down a procedure for the provision of information in the field of technical regulations and of rules on Information Society services3, with the exception of provisions relating to rules on information society services

OJ L 185, 8.7.2016, p. 1
2 OJ L 157, 9.6.2006, p. 1
3 OJ L 241, 17.9.2015, p. 1
& /en 392  Regulation (EU) No 1025/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 October 2012 on European standardisation, amending Council Directives 89/686/EEC and 93/15/EEC and Directives 94/9/EC, 94/25/EC, 95/16/EC, 97/23/EC, 98/34/EC, 2004/22/EC, 2007/23/EC, 2009/23/EC and 2009/105/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council and repealing Council Decision 87/95/EEC and Decision No
673/2006/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council
Regulation (EC) No 765/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council of
July 2008 setting out the requirements for accreditation and market surveillance relating to the marketing of products and repealing Regulation (EEC) No 339/93
Decision No 768/2008/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of
July 2008 on a common framework for the marketing of products, and repealing Council Decision 93/465/EEC
Regulation (EC) No 764/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council of
July 2008 laying down procedures relating to the application of certain national technical rules to products lawfully marketed in another Member State and repealing Decision No 3052/95/EC

OJ L 316, 14.11.2012, p. 12
2 OJ L 218, 13.8.2008, p. 30
3 OJ L 218, 13.8.2008, p. 82
4 OJ L 218, 13.8.2008, p. 21
& /en 393  Directive 2001/95/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of
December 2001 on general product safety
Council Regulation (EC) No 2679/98 of 7 December 1998 on the functioning of the internal market in relation to the free movement of goods among the Member States
Council Directive 85/374/EEC of 25 July 1985 on the approximation of the laws, regulations and administrative provisions of the Member States concerning liability for defective products
9. Motor vehicles, including agricultural and forestry tractors
Council Directive 70/157/EEC of 6 February 1970 on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to the permissible sound level and the exhaust system of motor vehicles
Regulation (EU) No 540/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 April 2014 on the sound level of motor vehicles and of replacement silencing systems, and amending Directive 2007/46/EC and repealing Directive 70/157/EEC

OJ L 11, 15.1.2002, p. 4
2 OJ L 337, 12.12.1998, p. 8
3 OJ L 210, 7.8.1985, p. 29
4 OJ L 42, 23.2.1970, p. 16
5 OJ L 158, 27.5.2014, p. 131
& /en 394  Directive 2005/64/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 October 2005 on the type-approval of motor vehicles with regard to their reusability, recyclability and recoverability and amending Council Directive 70/156/EEC
Directive 2006/40/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 17 May 2006 relating to emissions from air conditioning systems in motor vehicles and amending Council Directive 70/156/EEC
Regulation (EC) No 715/2007 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 20 June 2007 on type approval of motor vehicles with respect to emissions from light passenger and commercial vehicles (Euro 5 and Euro 6) and on access to vehicle repair and maintenance information
Directive 2007/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of
September 2007 establishing a framework for the approval of motor vehicles and their trailers, and of systems, components and separate technical units intended for such vehicles (Framework Directive)

OJ L 310, 25.11.2005, p. 10
2 OJ L 161, 14.6.2006, p. 12
3 OJ L 171, 29.6.2007, p. 1
4 OJ L 263, 9.10.2007, p. 1
& /en 395  Regulation (EU) 2018/858 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 30 May 2018 on the approval and market surveillance of motor vehicles and their trailers, and of systems, components and separate technical units intended for such vehicles, amending Regulations (EC) No 715/2007 and (EC) No 595/2009 and repealing Directive 2007/46/EC
Regulation (EC) No 78/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 14 January 2009 on the type-approval of motor vehicles with regard to the protection of pedestrians and other vulnerable road users, amending Directive 2007/46/EC and repealing Directives 2003/102/EC and 2005/66/EC
Regulation (EC) No 661/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 July 2009 concerning type-approval requirements for the general safety of motor vehicles, their trailers and systems, components and separate technical units intended therefor
Regulation (EC) No 79/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 14 January 2009 on type-approval of hydrogen-powered motor vehicles, and amending Directive 2007/46/EC

OJ L 151, 14.6.2018, p. 1
2 OJ L 35, 4.2.2009, p. 1
3 OJ L 200, 31.7.2009, p. 1
4 OJ L 35, 4.2.2009, p. 32
& /en 396  Regulation (EC) No 595/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 June 2009 on type-approval of motor vehicles and engines with respect to emissions from heavy duty vehicles (Euro VI) and on access to vehicle repair and maintenance information and amending Regulation (EC) No 715/2007 and Directive 2007/46/EC and repealing Directives 80/1269/EEC, 2005/55/EC and 2005/78/EC
Regulation (EU) No 168/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 January 2013 on the approval and market surveillance of two
or three
heel vehicles and quadricycles
Regulation (EU) 2015/758 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 29 April 2015 concerning type-approval requirements for the deployment of the eCall in-vehicle system based on the 112 service and amending Directive 2007/46/EC
Regulation (EC) No 443/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 April 2009 setting emissions performance standards for new passenger cars as part of the Community's integrated approach to reduce CO2 emissions from light-duty vehicles

OJ L 188, 18.7.2009, p. 1
2 OJ L 60, 2.3.2013, p. 52
3 OJ L 123, 19.5.2015, p. 77
4 OJ L 140, 5.6.2009, p. 1
& /en 397  Regulation (EU) No 510/2011 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 May 2011 setting emission performance standards for new light commercial vehicles as part of the Union's integrated approach to reduce CO 2 emissions from ligh
duty vehicles
Regulation (EU) No 167/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of
February 2013 on the approval and market surveillance of agricultural and forestry vehicles
10. Lifting and mechanical handling appliances
Council Directive 73/361/EEC of 19 November 1973 on the approximation of the laws, regulations and administrative provisions of the Member States relating to the certification and marking of wire-ropes, chains and hooks
Directive 2014/33/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 February 2014 on the harmonisation of the laws of the Member States relating to lifts and safety components for lifts

OJ L 145, 31.5.2011, p. 1
2 OJ L 60, 2.3.2013, p. 1
3 OJ L 335, 5.12.1973, p. 51
4 OJ L 96, 29.3.2014, p. 251
& /en 398 11. Gas appliances
Council Directive 92/42/EEC of 21 May 1992 on efficiency requirements for new hot-water boilers fired with liquid or gaseous fuels
Regulation (EU) 2016/426 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 9 March 2016 on appliances burning gaseous fuels and repealing Directive 2009/142/EC
12. Pressure vessels
Council Directive 75/324/EEC of 20 May 1975 on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to aerosol dispensers
Directive 2010/35/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 June 2010 on transportable pressure equipment and repealing Council Directives 76/767/EEC, 84/525/EEC, 84/526/EEC, 84/527/EEC and 1999/36/EC
Directive 2014/68/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 May 2014 on the harmonisation of the laws of the Member States relating to the making available on the market of pressure equipment

OJ L 167, 22.6.1992, p. 17
2 OJ L 81, 31.3.2016, p. 99
3 OJ L 147, 9.6.1975, p. 40
4 OJ L 165, 30.6.2010, p. 1
5 OJ L 189, 27.6.2014, p. 164
& /en 399  Directive 2014/29/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 February 2014 on the harmonisation of the laws of the Member States relating to the making available on the market of simple pressure vessels
13. Measuring instruments
Directive 2009/34/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 April 2009 relating to common provisions for both measuring instruments and methods of metrological control
Council Directive 75/107/EEC of 19 December 1974 on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to bottles used as measuring containers
Council Directive 76/211/EEC of 20 January 1976 on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to the making-up by weight or by volume of certain prepackaged products
Council Directive 80/181/EEC of 20 December 1979 on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to units of measurement and on the repeal of Directive 71/354/EEC

OJ L 96, 29.3.2014, p. 45
2 OJ L 106, 28.4.2009, p. 7
3 OJ L 42, 15.2.1975, p. 14
4 OJ L 46, 21.2.1976, p. 1
5 OJ L 39, 15.2.1980, p. 40
& /en 400  Directive 2007/45/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 5 September 2007 laying down rules on nominal quantities for prepacked products, repealing Council Directives 75/106/EEC and 80/232/EEC, and amending Council Directive 76/211/EEC
Directive 2011/17/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 9 March 2011 repealing Council Directives 71/317/EEC, 71/347/EEC, 71/349/EEC, 74/148/EEC, 75/33/EEC, 76/765/EEC, 76/766/EEC and 86/217/EEC regarding metrology
Directive 2014/31/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 February 2014 on the harmonisation of the laws of the Member States relating to the making available on the market of non-automatic weighing instruments
Directive 2014/32/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 February 2014 on the harmonisation of the laws of the Member States relating to the making available on the market of measuring instruments

OJ L 247, 21.9.2007, p. 17
2 OJ L 71, 18.3.2011, p. 1
3 OJ L 96, 29.3.2014, p. 107
4 OJ L 96, 29.3.2014, p. 149
& /en 401 14. Construction products, machinery, cableways, personal protective equipment
Regulation (EU) No 305/2011 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 9 March 2011 laying down harmonised conditions for the marketing of construction products and repealing Council Directive 89/106/EEC
Regulation (EU) 2016/425 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 9 March 2016 on personal protective equipment and repealing Council Directive 89/686/EEC
Regulation (EU) 2016/424 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 9 March 2016 on cableway installations and repealing Directive 2000/9/EC
Directive 2006/42/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 17 May 2006 on machinery, and amending Directive 95/16/EC
Regulation (EU) 2016/1628 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 14 September 2016 on requirements relating to gaseous and particulate pollutant emission limits and type-approval for internal combustion engines for non-road mobile machinery, amending Regulations (EU) No 1024/2012 and (EU) No 167/2013, and amending and repealing Directive 97/68/EC

OJ L 88, 4.4.2011, p. 5
2 OJ L 81, 31.3.2016, p. 51
3 OJ L 81, 31.3.2016, p. 1
4 OJ L 157, 9.6.2006, p. 24
5 OJ L 252, 16.9.2016, p. 53
& /en 402  Directive 2000/14/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 8 May 2000 on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to the noise emission in the environment by equipment for use outdoors
15. Electrical and radio equipment
Directive 2014/30/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 February 2014 on the harmonisation of the laws of the Member States relating to electromagnetic compatibility
Directive 2014/34/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 February 2014 on the harmonisation of the laws of the Member States relating to equipment and protective systems intended for use in potentially explosive atmospheres
Directive 2014/35/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 February 2014 on the harmonisation of the laws of the Member States relating to the making available on the market of electrical equipment designed for use within certain voltage limits

OJ L 162, 3.7.2000, p. 1
2 OJ L 96, 29.3.2014, p. 79
3 OJ L 96, 29.3.2014, p. 309
4 OJ L 96, 29.3.2014, p. 357
& /en 403  Directive 2014/53/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 April 2014 on the harmonisation of the laws of the Member States relating to the making available on the market of radio equipment and repealing Directive 1999/5/EC
16. Textiles, footwear
Regulation (EU) No 1007/2011 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 September 2011 on textile fibre names and related labelling and marking of the fibre composition of textile products and repealing Council Directive 73/44/EEC and Directives 96/73/EC and 2008/121/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council
Directive 94/11/EC of the European Parliament and the Council of 23 March 1994 on the approximation of the laws, regulation and administrative provisions of the Member States relating to labelling of the materials used in the main components of footwear for sale to the consumer
17. Cosmetics, toys
Regulation (EC) No 1223/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 30 November 2009 on cosmetic products

OJ L 153, 22.5.2014, p. 62
2 OJ L 272, 18.10.2011, p. 1
3 OJ L 100, 19.4.1994, p. 37
4 OJ L 342, 22.12.2009, p. 59
& /en 404  Directive 2009/48/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 June 2009 on the safety of toys
18. Recreational craft
Directive 2013/53/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 20 November 2013 on recreational craft and personal watercraft and repealing Directive 94/25/EC
19. Explosives and pyrotechnic articles
Directive 2014/28/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 February 2014 on the harmonisation of the laws of the Member States relating to the making available on the market and supervision of explosives for civil uses
Directive 2013/29/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 June 2013 on the harmonisation of the laws of the Member States relating to the making available on the market of pyrotechnic articles
Regulation (EU) No 98/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 January 2013 on the marketing and use of explosives precursors

OJ L 170, 30.6.2009, p. 1
2 OJ L 354, 28.12.2013, p. 90
3 OJ L 96, 29.3.2014, p. 1
4 OJ L 178, 28.6.2013, p. 27
5 OJ L 39, 9.2.2013, p. 1
& /en 405 20. Medicinal products
Regulation (EC) No 726/2004 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 31 March 2004 laying down Community procedures for the authorisation and supervision of medicinal products for human and veterinary use and establishing a European Medicines Agency
The references to Community in the second sub-paragraph of Articles 2 and in the second sub-paragraph of Article 48 of that Regulation shall not be read as including the United Kingdom in respect of Northern Ireland.
Directive 2001/83/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of
November 2001 on the Community code relating to medicinal products for human use
The references to Community in Articles 8(2) and 16b(1) of that Directive as well as the reference to Union in the last paragraph of Article 104(3) of that Directive shall not be read as including the United Kingdom in respect of Northern Ireland, with the exception of authorisations by the United Kingdom in respect of Northern Ireland.
A medicinal product authorised in the United Kingdom in respect of Northern Ireland shall not be considered as a reference medicinal product in the Union.

OJ L 136, 30.4.2004, p. 1
2 OJ L 311, 28.11.2001, p. 67
& /en 406  Regulation (EC) No 1901/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 December 2006 on medicinal products for paediatric use and amending Regulation (EEC) No 1768/92, Directive 2001/20/EC, Directive 2001/83/EC and Regulation (EC) No 726/20041, with the exception of Article 36
Regulation (EC) No 141/2000 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 December 1999 on orphan medicinal products
Regulation (EC) No 1394/2007 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 November 2007 on advanced therapy medicinal products and amending Directive 2001/83/EC and Regulation (EC) No 726/2004
Directive 2001/82/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 6 November 2001 on the Community code relating to veterinary medicinal products
The references to Community in Article 12(2) and the second paragraph of Article 74 of that Directive Regulation shall not be read as including the United Kingdom in respect of Northern Ireland, with the exception of authorisations by the United Kingdom in respect of Northern Ireland.

OJ L 378, 27.12.2006, p. 1.
OJ L 18, 22.1.2000, p. 1
3 OJ L 324, 10.12.2007, p. 121.
OJ L 311, 28.11.2001, p. 1
& /en 407 A veterinary medicinal product authorised in the United Kingdom in respect of Northern Ireland shall not be considered as a reference medicinal product in the Union.
Regulation (EC) No 470/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 6 May 2009 laying down Community procedures for the establishment of residue limits of pharmacologically active substances in foodstuffs of animal origin, repealing Council Regulation (EEC) No 2377/90 and amending Directive 2001/82/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council and Regulation (EC) No 726/2004 of the European Parliament and of the Council
Article 13 of Directive 2001/20/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 4 April 2001 on the approximation of the laws, regulations and administrative provisions of the Member States relating to the implementation of good clinical practice in the conduct of clinical trials on medicinal products for human use
Chapter IX of Regulation (EU) No 536/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 April 2014 on clinical trials on medicinal products for human use, and repealing Directive 2001/20/EC

OJ L 152, 16.6.2009, p. 11
2 OJ L 121, 1.5.2001, p. 34
3 OJ L 158, 27.5.2014, p. 1
& /en 408  Directive 2009/35/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 April 2009 on the colouring matters which may be added to medicinal products
Regulation (EU) 2016/793 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 May 2016 to avoid trade diversion into the European Union of certain key medicines
21. Medical devices
Council Directive 93/42/EEC of 14 June 1993 concerning medical devices
Directive 98/79/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 October 1998 on in vitro diagnostic medical devices
Council Directive 90/385/EEC of 20 June 1990 on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to active implantable medical devices
Regulation (EU) 2017/745 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 5 April 2017 on medical devices, amending Directive 2001/83/EC, Regulation (EC) No 178/2002 and Regulation (EC) No 1223/2009 and repealing Council Directives 90/385/EEC and 93/42/EEC

OJ L 109, 30.4.2009, p. 10
2 OJ L 135, 24.5.2016, p. 39
3 OJ L 169, 12.7.1993, p. 1
4 OJ L 331, 7.12.1998, p. 1
5 OJ L 189, 20.7.1990, p. 17
6 OJ L 117, 5.5.2017, p. 1
& /en 409  Regulation (EU) 2017/746 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 5 April 2017 on in vitro diagnostic medical devices and repealing Directive 98/79/EC and Commission Decision 2010/227/EU
22. Substances of human origin
Directive 2002/98/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 January 2003 setting standards of quality and safety for the collection, testing, processing, storage and distribution of human blood and blood components and amending Directive 2001/83/EC
Directive 2004/23/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 31 March 2004 on setting standards of quality and safety for the donation, procurement, testing, processing, preservation, storage and distribution of human tissues and cells
Directive 2010/45/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 7 July 2010 on standards of quality and safety of human organs intended for transplantation

OJ L 117, 5.5.2017, p. 176
2 OJ L 33, 8.2.2003, p. 30
3 OJ L 102, 7.4.2004, p. 48
4 OJ L 207, 6.8.2010, p. 14
& /en 410 23. Chemicals and related
Regulation (EC) No 2003/2003 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 October 2003 relating to fertilisers
Directive 2004/10/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 February 2004 on the harmonisation of laws, regulations and administrative provisions relating to the application of the principles of good laboratory practice and the verification of their applications for tests on chemical substances
Directive 2004/9/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 February 2004 on the inspection and verification of good laboratory practice (GLP)
Directive 2011/65/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 8 June 2011 on the restriction of the use of certain hazardous substances in electrical and electronic equipment
Regulation (EC) No 648/2004 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 31 March 2004 on detergents

OJ L 304, 21.11.2003, p. 1
2 OJ L 50, 20.2.2004, p. 44
3 OJ L 50, 20.2.2004, p. 28
4 OJ L 174, 1.7.2011, p. 88
5 OJ L 104, 8.4.2004, p. 1
& /en 411  Regulation (EC) No 850/2004 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 29 April 2004 on persistent organic pollutants and amending Directive 79/117/EEC
Regulation (EU) No 649/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 4 July 2012 concerning the export and import of hazardous chemicals
Regulation (EU) 2017/852 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 17 May 2017 on mercury, and repealing Regulation (EC) No 1102/2008)
Directive 2006/66/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 6 September 2006 on batteries and accumulators and waste batteries and accumulators and repealing Directive 91/157/EEC
Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 December 2006 concerning the Registration, Evaluation, Authorisation and Restriction of Chemicals (REACH), establishing a European Chemicals Agency, amending Directive 1999/45/EC and repealing Council Regulation (EEC) No 793/93 and Commission Regulation (EC) No 1488/94 as well as Council Directive 76/769/EEC and Commission Directives 91/155/EEC, 93/67/EEC, 93/105/EC and 2000/21/EC

OJ L 158, 30.4.2004, p. 7
2 OJ L 201, 27.7.2012, p. 60
3 OJ L 137, 24.5.2017, p. 1
4 OJ L 266, 26.9.2006, p. 1
5 OJ L 396, 30.12.2006, p. 1
& /en 412  Regulation (EC) No 1272/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 December 2008 on classification, labelling and packaging of substances and mixtures, amending and repealing Directives 67/548/EEC and 1999/45/EC, and amending Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006
Regulation (EC) No 273/2004 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 February 2004 on drug precursors
24. Pesticides, biocides
Regulation (EC) No 1107/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 21 October 2009 concerning the placing of plant protection products on the market and repealing Council Directives 79/117/EEC and 91/414/EEC
Regulation (EC) No 396/2005 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 February 2005 on maximum residue levels of pesticides in or on food and feed of plant and animal origin and amending Council Directive 91/414/EEC
The reference to Member States in Article 43 of that Regulation shall not be read as including the United Kingdom in respect of Northern Ireland.

OJ L 353, 31.12.2008, p. 1
2 OJ L 47, 18.2.2004, p. 1
3 OJ L 309, 24.11.2009, p. 1
4 OJ L 70, 16.3.2005, p. 1
& /en 413  Regulation (EU) No 528/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 May 2012 concerning the making available on the market and use of biocidal products
The reference
to Member State in Article
3(3), 15(1
and 28(4) and point (g) of Article 75(1) of that Regulation shall not be read as including the United Kingdom in respect of Northern Ireland.
25. Waste
Regulation (EC) No 1013/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 14 June 2006 on shipments of waste
Directive 94/62/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council 20 December 1994 on packaging and packaging waste
Regulation (EU) No 1257/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 20 November 2013 on ship recycling and amending Regulation (EC) No 1013/2006 and Directive 2009/16/EC

OJ L 167, 27.6.2012, p. 1
2 OJ L 190, 12.7.2006, p. 1
3 OJ L 365, 31.12.1994, p. 10
4 OJ L 330, 10.12.2013, p. 1
& /en 414  Council Directive 2006/117/Euratom of 20 November 2006 on the supervision and control of shipments of radioactive waste and spent fuel
26. Environment, energy efficiency
Regulation (EU) No 1143/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 October 2014 on the prevention and management of the introduction and spread of invasive alien species
Council Regulation (EC) No 708/2007 of 11 June 2007 concerning use of alien and locally absent species in aquaculture
Regulation (EC) No 66/2010 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 November 2009 on the EU Ecolabel
Directive 98/70/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 October 1998 relating to the quality of petrol and diesel fuels and amending Council Directive 93/12/EEC

OJ L 337, 5.12.2006, p. 21
2 OJ L 317, 4.11.2014, p. 35
3 OJ L 168, 28.6.2007, p. 1
4 OJ L 27, 30.1.2010, p. 1
5 OJ L 350, 28.12.1998, p. 58
& /en 415  Council Directive (EU) 2015/652 of 20 April 2015 laying down calculation methods and reporting requirements pursuant to Directive 98/70/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council relating to the quality of petrol and diesel fuels
Directive 2004/42/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 21 April 2004 on the limitation of emissions of volatile organic compounds due to the use of organic solvents in certain paints and varnishes and vehicle refinishing products and amending Directive 1999/13/EC
Regulation (EU) No 995/2010 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 20 October 2010 laying down the obligations of operators who place timber and timber products on the market
Council Regulation (EC) No 2173/2005 of 20 December 2005 on the establishment of a FLEGT licensing scheme for imports of timber into the European Community
Regulation (EU) No 517/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 April 2014 on fluorinates greenhouse gases and repealing Regulation (EC) No 842/2006

OJ L 107, 25.4.2015, p. 26
2 OJ L 143, 30.4.2004, p. 87
3 OJ L 295, 12.11.2010, p. 23
4 OJ L 347, 30.12.2005, p. 1
5 OJ L 150, 20.5.2014, p. 195
& /en 416  Regulation (EC) No 1005/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 September 2009 on substances that deplete the ozone layer
Regulation (EU) 2017/852 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 17 May 2017 on mercury, and repealing Regulation (EC) No 1102/2008
Council Regulation (EC) No 338/97 of 9 December 1996 on the protection of species of wild fauna and flora by regulating trade therein
Council Regulation (EEC) No 3254/91 of 4 November 1991 prohibiting the use of leghold traps in the Community and the introduction into the Community of pelts and manufactured goods of certain wild animal species originating in countries which catch them by means of leghold traps or trapping methods which do not meet international humane trapping standards
Regulation (EC) No 1007/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 September 2009 on trade in seal products

OJ L 286, 31.10.2009, p. 1
2 OJ L 137, 24.5.2017, p. 1
3 OJ L 61, 3.3.1997, p. 1
4 OJ L 308, 9.11.1991, p. 1
5 OJ L 286, 31.10.2009, p. 36
& /en 417  Regulation (EC) No 1523/2007 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 December 2007 banning the placing on the market and the import to, or export from, the Community of cat and dog fur, and products containing such fur
Council Directive 83/129/EEC of 28 March 1983 concerning the importation into Member States of skins of certain seal pups and products derived therefrom
Regulation (EC) No 106/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 January 2008 on a Community energy-efficiency labelling programme for office equipment
Regulation (EC) No 1222/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 November 2009 on the labelling of tyres with respect to fuel efficiency and other essential parameters
Directive 2009/125/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 21 October 2009 establishing a framework for the setting of ecodesign requirements for energy-related products

OJ L 343, 27.12.2007, p. 1
2 OJ L 91, 9.4.1983, p. 30
3 OJ L 39, 13.2.2008, p. 1
4 OJ L 342, 22.12.2009, p. 46
5 OJ L 285, 31.10.2009, p. 10
& /en 418  Regulation (EU) 2017/1369 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 4 July 2017 setting a framework for energy labelling and repealing Directive 2010/30/EU
27. Marine equipment
Directive 2014/90/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 July 2014 on marine equipment and repealing Council Directive 96/98/EC
28. Rail transport
Directive (EU) 2016/797 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 May 2016 on the interoperability of the rail system within the European Union3, in so far as conditions and technical specifications for the placing on the market, putting into service and free movement of railway products are concerned
29. Food  general
Regulation (EC) No 178/2002 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 28 January 2002 laying down the general principles and requirements of food law, establishing the European Food Safety Authority and laying down procedures in matters of food safety

OJ L 198, 28.7.2017, p. 1
2 OJ L 257, 28.8.2014, p. 146
3 OJ L 138, 26.5.2016, p. 44
4 OJ L 31, 1.2.2002, p. 1
& /en 419 The reference to Member State in the second subparagraph of Article 29(1) of that Regulation shall not be read as including the United Kingdom in respect of Northern Ireland.
Regulation (EU) No 1169/2011 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 October 2011 on the provision of food information to consumers, amending Regulations (EC) No 1924/2006 and (EC) No 1925/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council, and repealing Commission Directive 87/250/EEC, Council Directive 90/496/EEC, Commission Directive 1999/10/EC, Directive 2000/13/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council, Commission Directives 2002/67/EC and 2008/5/EC and Commission Regulation (EC) No 608/2004
Regulation (EC) 1924/2006 on nutrition and health claims made on foods
30. Food  hygiene
Regulation (EC) No 853/2004 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 29 April 2004 laying down specific hygiene rules for food of animal origin

OJ L 304, 22.11.2011, p. 18
2 OJ L 404, 30.12.2006, p. 9
3 OJ L 139, 30.4.2004, p. 55
& /en 420  Regulation (EC) No 852/2004 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 29 April 2004 on the hygiene of foodstuffs
Council Directive 89/108/EEC of 21 December 1988 on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to quick-frozen foodstuffs for human consumption
31. Food  ingredients, traces, residues, marketing standards
Regulation (EC) No 1331/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 December 2008 establishing a common authorisation procedure for food additives, food enzymes and food flavourings
The reference to Member State in Article 3(1) of that Regulation shall not be read as including the United Kingdom in respect of Northern Ireland.
Regulation (EC) No 1332/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 December 2008 on food enzymes and amending Council Directive 83/417/EEC, Council Regulation (EC) No 1493/1999, Directive 2000/13/EC, Council Directive 2001/112/EC and Regulation (EC) No 258/97

OJ L 139, 30.4.2004, p. 1
2 OJ L 40, 11.2.1989, p. 34
3 OJ L 354, 31.12.2008, p. 1
4 OJ L 354, 31.12.2008, p. 7
& /en 421  Regulation (EC) No 1333/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 December 2008 on food additives
Regulation (EC) No 1334/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 December 2008 on flavourings and certain food ingredients with flavouring properties for use in and on foods and amending Council Regulation (EEC) No 1601/91, Regulations (EC) No 2232/96 and (EC) No 110/2008 and Directive 2000/13/EC
Directive 2002/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 10 June 2002 on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to food supplements
Regulation (EC) No 1925/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 20 December 2006 on the addition of vitamins and minerals and of certain other substances to foods
Regulation (EC) No 2065/2003 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 10 November 2003 on smoke flavourings used or intended for use in or on foods
The reference to Member State in Article 7(2) of that Regulation shall not be read as including the United Kingdom in respect of Northern Ireland.

OJ L 354, 31.12.2008, p. 16
2 OJ L 354, 31.12.2008, p. 34
3 OJ L 183, 12.7.2002, p. 51
4 OJ L 404, 30.12.2006, p. 26
5 OJ L 309, 26.11.2003, p. 1
& /en 422  Council Regulation (EEC) No 315/93 of 8 February 1993 laying down Community procedures for contaminants in food
Regulation (EU) 2015/2283 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 November 2015 on novel foods, amending Regulation (EU) No 1169/2011 of the European Parliament and of the Council and repealing Regulation (EC) No 258/97 of the European Parliament and of the Council and Commission Regulation (EC) No 1852/2001
Regulation (EU) No 609/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 June 2013 on food intended for infants and young children, food for special medical purposes, and total diet replacement for weight control and repealing Council Directive 92/52/EEC, Commission Directives 96/8/EC, 1999/21/EC, 2006/125/EC and 2006/141/EC, Directive 2009/39/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council and Commission Regulations (EC) No 41/2009 and (EC) No 953/2009
Directive 1999/4/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 February 1999 relating to coffee extracts and chicory extracts

OJ L 37, 13.2.1993, p. 1
2 OJ L 327, 11.12.2015, p. 1
3 OJ L 181, 29.6.2013, p. 35
4 OJ L 66, 13.3.1999, p. 26
& /en 423  Directive 2000/36/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 June 2000 relating to cocoa and chocolate products intended for human consumption
Council Directive 2001/110/EC of 20 December 2001 relating to honey
Council Directive 2001/111/EC of 20 December 2001 relating to certain sugars intended for human consumption
Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) No 543/2011 of 7 June 2011 laying down detailed rules for the application of Council Regulation (EC) No 1234/2007 in respect of the fruit and vegetables and processed fruit and vegetables sectors
Commission Regulation (EC) No 1295/2008 of 18 December 2008 on the importation of hops from third countries
Commission Regulation (EC) No 1375/2007 of 23 November 2007 on imports of residues from the manufacture of starch from maize from the United States of America

OJ L 197, 3.8.2000, p. 19
2 OJ L 10, 12.1.2002, p. 47
3 OJ L 10, 12.1.2002, p. 53
4
J L 157, 15.6.2011, p. 1
5 OJ L 340, 19.12.2008, p. 45
6 OJ L 307 24.11.2007, p. 5
& /en 424  Council Directive 2001/112/EC of 20 December 2001 relating to fruit juices and certain similar products intended for human consumption
Council Directive 2001/113/EC of 20 December 2001 relating to fruit jams, jellies and marmalades and sweetened chestnut purée intended for human consumption
Council Directive 2001/114/EC of 20 December 2001 relating to certain partly or wholly dehydrated preserved milk for human consumption
Directive (EU) 2015/2203 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 November 2015 on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to caseins and caseinates intended for human consumption and repealing Council Directive 83/417/EEC
Chapter IV of Title
of Regulation (EU) No 1306/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 17 December 2013 on the financing, management and monitoring of the common agricultural policy and repealing Council Regulations (EEC) No 352/78, (EC) No 165/94, (EC) No 2799/98, (EC) No 814/2000, (EC) No 1290/2005 and (EC) No 485/2008

OJ L 10, 12.1.2002, p. 58
2 OJ L 10, 12.1.2002, p. 67
3 OJ L 15, 17.1.2002, p. 19
4 OJ L 314, 1.12.2015, p. 1
5 OJ L 347, 20.12.2013, p. 549
& /en 425  Section 1 of Chapter I of Title II of Part II of Regulation (EU) No 1308/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 17 December 2013 establishing a common organisation of the markets in agricultural products and repealing Council Regulations (EEC) No 922/72, (EEC) No 234/79, (EC) No 1037/2001 and (EC) No 1234/2007
32. Food contact material
Regulation (EC) No 1935/2004 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 October 2004 on materials and articles intended to come into contact with food and repealing Directives 80/590/EEC and 89/109/EEC
The reference to Member State in Article 9(1) of that Regulation shall not be read as including the United Kingdom in respect of Northern Ireland.
Council Directive 84/500/EEC of 15 October 1984 on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to ceramic articles intended to come into contact with foodstuffs

OJ L 347, 20.12.2013, p. 671
2 OJ L 338, 13.11.2004, p. 4
3 OJ L 277, 20.10.1984, p. 12
& /en 426 33. Food  other
Directive 1999/2/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 February 1999 on the approximation of the laws of the Member States concerning foods and food ingredients treated with ionising radiation
Directive 1999/3/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 February 1999 on the establishment of a Community list of foods and food ingredients treated with ionising radiation
Directive 2009/32/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 April 2009 on the approximation of the laws of the Member States on extraction solvents used in the production of foodstuffs and food ingredients
Directive 2009/54/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 June 2009 on the exploitation and marketing of natural mineral waters
Council Regulation (EC) No 834/2007 of 28 June 2007 on organic production and labelling of organic products and repealing Regulation (EEC) No 2092/91

OJ L 66, 13.3.1999, p. 16
2 OJ L 66, 13.3.1999, p. 24
3 OJ L 141, 6.6.2009, p. 3
4 OJ L 164, 26.6.2009, p. 45
5 OJ L 189, 20.7.2007, p. 1
& /en 427  Regulation (EU) 2018/848 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 30 May 2018 on organic production and labelling of organic products and repealing Council Regulation (EC) No 834/2007
Council Regulation (Euratom) 2016/52 of 15 January 2016 laying down maximum permitted levels of radioactive contamination of food and feed following a nuclear accident or any other case of radiological emergency, and repealing Regulation (Euratom) No 3954/87 and Commission Regulations (Euratom) No 944/89 and (Euratom) No 770/90
Council Regulation (EC) No 733/2008 of 15 July 2008 on the conditions governing imports of agricultural products originating in third countries following the accident at the Chernobyl nuclear power station
34. Feed  products and hygiene
Regulation (EC) No 767/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 July 2009 on the placing on the market and use of feed, amending European Parliament and Council Regulation (EC) No 1831/2003 and repealing Council Directive 79/373/EEC, Commission Directive 80/511/EEC, Council Directives 82/471/EEC, 83/228/EEC, 93/74/EEC, 93/113/EC and 96/25/EC and Commission Decision 2004/217/EC

OJ L 150, 14.6.2018, p. 1
2 OJ L 13, 20.1.2016, p. 2
3 OJ L 201, 30.7.2008, p. 1
4 OJ L 229, 1.9.2009, p.1
& /en 428  Directive 2002/32/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 7 May 2002 on undesirable substances in animal feed
Regulation (EC) No 1831/2003 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 September 2003 on additives for use in animal nutrition
The reference
to national reference laboratories in point 6 of Annex II to that Regulation shall not be read as applying to the United Kingdom in respect of Northern Ireland. This shall not prevent a national reference laboratory located in a Member State of the European Union from fulfilling the functions of a national reference laboratory in respect of Northern Ireland. Information and material exchanged between the competent authorities of Northern Ireland and a national reference laboratory by virtue of this provision shall be confidential to those competent authorities and not subject to further disclosure by the national reference laboratory without the prior consent of those competent authorities.
Council Directive 90/167/EEC of 26 March 1990 laying down the conditions governing the preparation, placing on the market and use of medicated feedingstuffs in the Community
Regulation (EC) No 183/2005 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 January 2005 laying down requirements for feed hygiene

OJ L 140, 30.5.2002, p. 10
2 OJ L 268, 18.10.2003, p. 29
3 OJ L 92, 7.4.1990, p. 42
4 OJ L 35, 8.2.2005, p. 1
& /en 429 35. GMOs
Regulation (EC) No 1829/2003 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 September 2003 on genetically modified food and feed1, with the exception of the second paragraph of Article 32
This shall not prevent a national reference laboratory located in a Member State of the European Union from fulfilling the functions of a national reference laboratory in respect of Northern Ireland. Information and material exchanged between the competent authorities of Northern Ireland and a national reference laboratory by virtue of this provision shall be confidential to those competent authorities and not subject to further disclosure by the national reference laboratory without the prior consent of those competent authorities.
The references to Member State in Articles 10(1) and 22(1) of that Regulation shall not be read as including the United Kingdom in respect of Northern Ireland.
Regulation (EC) No 1830/2003 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 September 2003 concerning the traceability and labelling of genetically modified organisms and the traceability of food and feed products produced from genetically modified organisms and amending Directive 2001/18/EC

OJ L 268, 18.10.2003, p. 1
2 OJ L 268, 18.10.2003, p. 24
& /en 430  Regulation (EC) No 1946/2003 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 July 2003 on transboundary movements of genetically modified organisms
Part C of Directive 2001/18/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 March 2001 on the deliberate release into the environment of genetically modified organisms and repealing Council Directive 90/220/EEC
36. Live animals, germinal products and products of animal origin
References to national reference laboratories in the acts listed in this section shall not be read as including the reference laboratory in the United Kingdom. This shall not prevent a national reference laboratory located in a Member State of the European Union from fulfilling the functions of a national reference laboratory in respect of Northern Ireland. Information and material exchanged between the competent authorities of Northern Ireland and a national reference laboratory by virtue of these provisions shall be confidential to those competent authorities and not subject to further disclosure by the national reference laboratory without the prior consent of those competent authorities.
Regulation (EU) 2016/429 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 9 March 2016 on transmissible animal diseases and amending and repealing certain acts in the area of animal health ("Animal Health Law
3

OJ L 287, 5.11.2003, p. 1
2 OJ L 106, 17.4.2001, p. 1
3 OJ L 84, 31.3.2016, p. 1
& /en 431  Council Directive 64/432/EEC of 26 June 1964 on animal health problems affecting intra-Community trade in bovine animals and swine
Council Directive 91/68/EEC of 28 January 1991 on animal health conditions governing intra-Community trade in ovine and caprine animals
Council Directive 2009/156/EC of 30 November 2009 on animal health conditions governing the movement and importation from third countries of equidae
Council Directive 2009/158/EC of 30 November 2009 on animal health conditions governing intra-Community trade in, and imports from third countries of, poultry and hatching eggs
Council Directive 92/65/EEC of 13 July 1992 laying down animal health requirements governing trade in and imports into the Community of animals, semen, ova and embryos not subject to animal health requirements laid down in specific Community rules referred to in Annex A (I) to Directive 90/425/EEC

OJ 121, 29.7.1964, p. 1977
2 OJ L 46, 19.2.1991, p. 19
3 OJ L 192, 23.7.2010, p. 1
4 OJ L 343, 22.12.2009, p. 74
5 OJ L 268, 14.9.1992, p. 54
& /en 432  Council Directive 88/407/EEC of 14 June 1988 laying down the animal health requirements applicable to intra
Community trade in and imports of deep-frozen semen of domestic animals of the bovine species
Council Directive 89/556/EEC of 25 September 1989 on animal health conditions governing intra-Community trade in and importation from third countries of embryos of domestic animals of the bovine species
Council Directive 90/429/EEC of 26 June 1990 laying down the animal health requirements applicable to intra
Community trade in and imports of semen of domestic animals of the porcine species
Council Directive 92/118/EEC of 17 December 1992 laying down animal health and public health requirements governing trade in and imports into the Community of products not subject to the said requirements laid down in specific Community rules referred to in Annex A (I) to Directive 89/662/EEC and, as regards pathogens, to Directive 90/425/EEC

OJ L 194, 22.7.1988, p. 10
2 OJ L 302, 19.10.1989, p. 1
3 OJ L 224, 18.8.1990, p. 62
4 OJ L 62, 15.3.1993, p. 49
& /en 433  Council Directive 2006/88/EC of 24 October 2006 on animal health requirements for aquaculture animals and products thereof, and on the prevention and control of certain diseases in aquatic animals
Council Directive 2004/68/EC of 26 April 2004 laying down animal health rules for the importation into and transit through the Community of certain live ungulate animals, amending Directives 90/426/EEC and 92/65/EEC and repealing Directive 72/462/EEC
Council Directive 2002/99/EC of 16 December 2002 laying down the animal health rules governing the production, processing, distribution and introduction of products of animal origin for human consumption
Regulation (EU) No 576/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 June 2013 on the non-commercial movement of pet animals and repealing Regulation (EC) No 998/2003
Regulation (EC) No 1069/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 21 October 2009 laying down health rules as regards animal by-products and derived products not intended for human consumption and repealing Regulation (EC) No 1774/2002 (Animal by-products Regulation)

OJ L 328, 24.11.2006, p. 14
2 OJ L 139, 30.4.2004, p. 321
3 OJ L 18, 23.1.2003, p. 11
4 OJ L 178, 28.6.2013, p. 1
5 OJ L 300, 14.11.2009, p. 1
& /en 434 37. Animal disease control, zoonosis control
References to national reference laboratories in the acts listed in this section shall not be read as including the reference laboratory in the United Kingdom. This shall not prevent a national reference laboratory located in a Member State of the European Union from fulfilling the functions of a national reference laboratory in respect of Northern Ireland. Information and material exchanged between the competent authorities of Northern Ireland and a national reference laboratory by virtue of these provisions shall be confidential to those competent authorities and not subject to further disclosure by the national reference laboratory without the prior consent of those competent authorities.
Regulation (EC) No 999/2001 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 May 2001 laying down rules for the prevention, control and eradication of certain transmissible spongiform encephalopathies
Council Directive 77/391/EEC of 17 May 1977 introducing Community measures for the eradication of brucellosis, tuberculosis and leucosis in cattle
Council Directive 78/52/EEC of 13 December 1977 establishing the Community criteria for national plans for the accelerated eradication of brucellosis, tuberculosis and enzootic leukosis in cattle

OJ L 147, 31.5.2001, p. 1
2 OJ L 145, 13.6.1977, p. 44
3 OJ L 15, 19.1.1978, p. 34
& /en 435  Council Directive 2003/85/EC of 29 September 2003 on Community measures for the control of foot-and-mouth disease repealing Directive 85/511/EEC and Decisions 89/531/EEC and 91/665/EEC and amending Directive 92/46/EEC
Council Directive 2005/94/EC of 20 December 2005 on Community measures for the control of avian influenza and repealing Directive 92/40/EEC
Council Directive 2001/89/EC of 23 October 2001 on Community measures for the control of classical swine fever
Council Directive 92/35/EEC of 29 April 1992 laying down control rules and measures to combat African horse sickness
Council Directive 2002/60/EC of 27 June 2002 laying down specific provisions for the control of African swine fever and amending Directive 92/119/EEC as regards Teschen disease and African swine fever

OJ L 306, 22.11.2003, p. 1
2 OJ L 10, 14.1.2006, p. 16
3 OJ L 316, 1.12.2001, p. 5
4 OJ L 157, 10.6.1992, p. 19
5 OJ L 192, 20.7.2002, p. 27
& /en 436  Regulation (EC) No 2160/2003 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 17 November 2003 on the control of salmonella and other specified food-borne zoonotic agents
Council Directive 92/66/EEC of 14 July 1992 introducing Community measures for the control of Newcastle disease
Council Directive 92/119/EEC of 17 December 1992 introducing general Community measures for the control of certain animal diseases and specific measures relating to swine vesicular disease
Directive 2003/99/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 17 November 2003 on the monitoring of zoonoses and zoonotic agents, amending Council Decision 90/424/EEC and repealing Council Directive 92/117/EEC
Council Directive 2000/75/EC of 20 November 2000 laying down specific provisions for the control and eradication of bluetongue

OJ L 325, 12.12.2003, p. 1
2 OJ L 260, 5.9.1992, p. 1
3 OJ L 62, 15.3.1993, p. 69
4 OJ L 325, 12.12.2003, p. 31
5 OJ L 327, 22.12.2000, p. 74
& /en 437 38. Animal identification
Council Regulation (EC) No 21/2004 of 17 December 2003 establishing a system for the identification and registration of ovine and caprine animals and amending Regulation (EC) No 1782/2003 and Directives 92/102/EEC and 64/432/EEC
Regulation (EC) No 1760/2000 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 17 July 2000 establishing a system for the identification and registration of bovine animals and regarding the labelling of beef and beef products and repealing Council Regulation (EC) No 820/97
Council Directive 2008/71/EC of 15 July 2008 on the identification and registration of pigs
39. Animal breeding
Article 37 and Article 64(3) of Regulation (EU) 2016/1012 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 8 June 2016 on zootechnical and genealogical conditions for the breeding, trade in and entry into the Union of purebred breeding animals, hybrid breeding pigs and the germinal products thereof and amending Regulation (EU) No 652/2014, Council Directives 89/608/EEC and 90/425/EEC and repealing certain acts in the area of animal breeding ("Animal Breeding Regulation
4

OJ L 5, 9.1.2004, p. 8
2 OJ L 204, 11.8.2000, p. 1
3 OJ L 213, 8.8.2008, p. 31
4 OJ L 171, 29.6.2016, p. 66
& /en 438 40. Animal welfare
Council Regulation (EC) No 1/2005 of 22 December 2004 on the protection of animals during transport and related operations and amending Directives 64/432/EEC and 93/119/EC and Regulation (EC) No 1255/97
Council Regulation (EC) No 1099/2009 of 24 September 2009 on the protection of animals at the time of killing
41. Plant health
Council Directive 2000/29/EC of 8 May 2000 on protective measures against the introduction into the Community of organisms harmful to plants or plant products and against their spread within the Community
Regulation (EU) 2016/2031 of the European Parliament of the Council of 26 October 2016 on protective measures against pests of plants, amending Regulations (EU) No 228/2013, (EU) No 652/2014 and (EU) No 1143/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council and repealing Council Directives 69/464/EEC, 74/647/EEC, 93/85/EEC, 98/57/EC, 2000/29/EC, 2006/91/EC and 2007/33/EC

OJ L 3, 5.1.2005, p. 1
2 OJ L 303, 18.11.2009, p. 1
3 OJ L 169, 10.7.2000, p. 1
4 OJ L 317, 23.11.2016, p. 4
& /en 439 42. Plant reproductive material
Council Directive 66/402/EEC of 14 June 1966 on the marketing of cereal seed
Council Directive 68/193/EEC of 9 April 1968 on the marketing of material for the vegetative propagation of the vine
Council Directive 1999/105/EC of 22 December 1999 on the marketing of forest reproductive material
Council Directive 2002/53/EC of 13 June 2002 on the common catalogue of varieties of agricultural plant species
Council Directive 2002/54/EC of 13 June 2002 on the marketing of beet seed
Council Directive 2002/55/EC of 13 June 2002 on the marketing of vegetable seed

OJ 125, 11.7.1966, p. 2309
2 OJ L 93, 17.4.1968, p. 15
3 OJ L 11, 15.1.2000, p. 17
4 OJ L 193, 20.7.2002, p. 1
5 OJ L 193, 20.7.2002, p. 12
6 OJ L 193, 20.7.2002, p. 33
& /en 440  Council Directive 2002/56/EC of 13 June 2002 on the marketing of seed potatoes
Council Directive 2002/57/EC of 13 June 2002 on the marketing of seed of oil and fibre plants
Council Directive 2008/90/EC of 29 September 2008 on the marketing of fruit plant propagating material and fruit plants intended for fruit production
43. Official controls, veterinary checks
References to national reference laboratories in the acts listed in this section shall not be read as including the reference laboratory in the United Kingdom. This shall not prevent a national reference laboratory located in a Member State of the European Union from fulfilling the functions of a national reference laboratory in respect of Northern Ireland. Information and material exchanged between the competent authorities of Northern Ireland and a national reference laboratory by virtue of these provisions shall be confidential to those competent authorities and not subject to further disclosure by the national reference laboratory without the prior consent of those competent authorities.

OJ L 193, 20.7.2002, p. 60
2 OJ L 193, 20.7.2002, p. 74
3 OJ L 267, 8.10.2008, p. 8
& /en 441  Regulation (EU) 2017/625 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 March 2017 on official controls and other official activities performed to ensure the application of food and feed law, rules on animal health and welfare, plant health and plant protection products, amending Regulations (EC) No 999/2001, (EC) No 396/2005, (EC) No 1069/2009, (EC) No 1107/2009, (EU) No 1151/2012, (EU) No 652/2014, (EU) 2016/429 and (EU) 2016/2031 of the European Parliament and of the Council, Council Regulations (EC) No 1/2005 and (EC) No 1099/2009 and Council Directives 98/58/EC, 1999/74/EC, 2007/43/EC, 2008/119/EC and 2008/120/EC, and repealing Regulations (EC) No 854/2004 and (EC) No 882/2004 of the European Parliament and of the Council, Council Directives 89/608/EEC, 89/662/EEC, 90/425/EEC, 91/496/EEC, 96/23/EC, 96/93/EC and 97/78/EC and Council Decision 92/438/EEC (Official Controls Regulation)
Regulation (EC) No 882/2004 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 29 April 2004 on official controls performed to ensure the verification of compliance with feed and food law, animal health and animal welfare rules
Regulation (EC) No 854/2004 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 29 April 2004 laying down specific rules for the organisation of official controls on products of animal origin intended for human consumption

OJ L 95, 7.4.2017, p. 1
2 OJ L 165, 30.4.2004, p. 1
3 OJ L 139, 30.4.2004, p. 206
& /en 442  Council Directive 91/496/EEC of 15 July 1991 laying down the principles governing the organization of veterinary checks on animals entering the Community from third countries and amending Directives 89/662/EEC, 90/425/EEC and 90/675/EEC
Council Directive 97/78/EC of 18 December 1997 laying down the principles governing the organisation of veterinary checks on products entering the Community from third countries
Council Directive 90/425/EEC of 26 June 1990 concerning veterinary and zootechnical checks applicable in intra
Community trade in certain live animals and products with a view to the completion of the internal market
Council Directive 89/662/EEC of 11 December 1989 concerning veterinary checks in intra-Community trade with a view to the completion of the internal market
44. Sanitary and phytosanitary
Other
Council Directive 96/22/EC of 29 April 1996 concerning the prohibition on the use in stockfarming of certain substances having a hormonal or thyrostatic action and of
-agonists, and repealing Directives 81/602/EEC, 88/146/EEC and 88/299/EEC

OJ L 268, 24.9.1991, p. 56
2 OJ L 24, 30.1.1998, p. 9
3 OJ L 224, 18.8.1990, p. 29
4 OJ L 395, 30.12.1989, p. 13
5 OJ L 125, 23.5.1996, p. 3
& /en 443  Council Directive 96/23/EC of 29 April 1996 on measures to monitor certain substances and residues thereof in live animals and animal products and repealing Directives 85/358/EEC and 86/469/EEC and Decisions 89/187/EEC and 91/664/EEC
45. Intellectual property
Regulation (EC) No 110/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 January 2008 on the definition, description, presentation, labelling and the protection of geographical indications of spirit drinks and repealing Council Regulation (EEC) No 1576/89
Regulation (EU) No 1151/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 21 November 2012 on quality schemes for agricultural products and foodstuffs
Regulation (EU) No 251/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 February 2014 on the definition, description, presentation, labelling and the protection of geographical indications of aromatized wine products and repealing Council Regulation (EEC) No 1601/91

OJ L 125, 23.5.1996, p. 10
2 OJ L 39, 13.2.2008, p. 16
3 OJ L 343, 14.12.2012, p. 1
4 OJ L 84, 20.3.2014, p. 14
& /en 444  Sections 2 and 3 of Chapter I of Title II of Part II of Regulation (EU) No 1308/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 17 December 2013 establishing a common organisation of the markets in agricultural products and repealing Council Regulations (EEC) No 922/72, (EEC) No 234/79, (EC) No 1037/2001 and (EC) No 1234/2007
Regulation (EU) No 608/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 June 2013 concerning customs enforcement of intellectual property rights and repealing Council Regulation (EC) No 1383/2003
46. Fisheries and aquaculture
Commission Regulation (EEC) No 3703/85 of 23 December 1985 laying down detailed rules for applying the common marketing standards for certain fresh or chilled fish
Council Regulation (EEC) No 2136/89 of 21 June 1989 laying down common marketing standards for preserved sardines and trade descriptions for preserved sardines

OJ L 347, 20.12.2013, p. 671
2 OJ L 181, 29.6.2013, p. 15
3 OJ L 351, 28.12.1985, p. 63
4 OJ L 212, 22.7.1989, p. 79
& /en 445  Council Regulation (EEC) No 1536/92 of 9 June 1992 laying down common marketing standards for preserved tuna and bonito
Council Regulation (EC) No 2406/96 of 26 November 1996 laying down common marketing standards for certain fishery products
Council Regulation (EC) No 850/98 of 30 March 1998 for the conservation of fishery resources through technical measures for the protection of juveniles of marine organisms3, in so far as it concerns provisions relating to minimum sizes of marine organisms
Council Regulation (EC) No 1224/2009 of 20 November 2009 establishing a Community control system for ensuring compliance with the rules of the common fisheries policy, amending Regulations (EC) No 847/96, (EC) No 2371/2002, (EC) No 811/2004, (EC) No 768/2005, (EC) No 2115/2005, (EC) No 2166/2005, (EC) No 388/2006, (EC) No 509/2007, (EC) No 676/2007, (EC) No 1098/2007, (EC) No 1300/2008, (EC) No 1342/2008 and repealing Regulations (EEC) No 2847/93, (EC) No 1627/94 and (EC) No 1966/20064, in so far as it concerns provisions relating to marketing standards

OJ L 163, 17.6.1992, p. 1
2 OJ L 334, 23.12.1996, p. 1
3 OJ L 125, 27.4.1998, p. 1
4 OJ L 343, 22.12.2009, p. 1
& /en 446  Regulation (EU) No 1379/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 December 2013 on the common organisation of the markets in fishery and aquaculture products amending Council Regulations (EC) No 1184/2006 and (EC) No 1224/2009 and repealing Council Regulation (EC) No 104/20001, in so far as it concerns provisions relating to marketing standards and consumer information
Regulation (EU) No 1380/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 December 2013 on the Common Fisheries Policy, amending Council Regulations (EC) No 1954/2003 and (EC) No 1224/2009 and repealing Council Regulations (EC) No 2371/2002 and (EC) No 639/2004 and Council Decision 2004/585/EC2, in so far as it concerns provisions relating to marketing standards for fishery and aquaculture products
Council Regulation (EC) No 1005/2008 of 29 September 2008 establishing a Community system to prevent, deter and eliminate illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing, amending Regulations (EEC) No 2847/93, (EC) No 1936/2001 and (EC) No 601/2004 and repealing Regulations (EC) No 1093/94 and (EC) No 1447/1999
Council Regulation (EC) No 1035/2001 of 22 May 2001 establishing a catch documentation scheme for Dissostichus spp

OJ L 354, 28.12.2013, p. 1
2 OJ L 354, 28.12.2013, p. 22
3 OJ L 286, 29.10.2008, p. 1
4 OJ L 145, 31.5.2001, p. 1
& /en 447  Regulation (EU) No 640/2010 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 7 July 2010 establishing a catch documentation programme for bluefin tuna Thunnus thynnus and amending Council Regulation (EC) No 1984/2003
Council Regulation (EC) No 1100/2007 of 18 September 2007 establishing measures for the recovery of the stock of European eel
47. Other
Part III of Regulation (EU) No 1308/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 17 December 2013 establishing a common organisation of the markets in agricultural products and repealing Council Regulations (EEC) No 922/72, (EEC) No 234/79, (EC) No 1037/2001 and (EC) No 1234/20073, with the exception of Chapter VI
Council Regulation (EC) No 2964/95 of 20 December 1995 introducing registration for crude oil imports and deliveries in the Community
Council Regulation (EC) No 2182/2004 of 6 December 2004 concerning medals and tokens similar to euro coins

OJ L 194, 24.7.2010, p. 1
2 OJ L 248, 22.9.2007, p. 17
3 OJ L 347, 20.12.2013, p. 671
4 OJ L 310, 22.12.1995, p. 5
5 OJ L 373, 21.12.2004, p. 1
& /en 448  Regulation (EC) No 1889/2005 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 October 2005 on controls of cash entering or leaving the Community
Directive 2014/40/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 3 April 2014 on the approximation of the laws, regulations and administrative provisions of the Member States concerning the manufacture, presentation and sale of tobacco and related products and repealing Directive 2001/37/EC
Council Regulation (EC) No 116/2009 of 18 December 2008 on the export of cultural goods
Directive 2014/60/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 May 2014 on the return of cultural objects unlawfully removed from the territory of a Member State and amending Regulation (EU) No 1024/2012
Council Directive 69/493/EEC of 15 December 1969 on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to crystal glass

OJ L 309, 25.11.2005, p. 9
2 OJ L 127, 29.4.2014, p. 1
3 OJ L 39, 10.2.2009, p. 1
4 OJ L 159, 28.5.2014, p. 1
5 OJ L 326, 29.12.1969, p. 36
& /en 449  Council Regulation (EC) No 428/2009 of 5 May 2009 setting up a Community regime for the control of exports, transfer, brokering and transit of dual-use items
Council Directive 91/477/EEC of 18 June 1991 on control of the acquisition and possession of weapons
Regulation (EU) No 258/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 14 March 2012 implementing Article 10 of the United Nations
Protocol against the illicit manufacturing of and trafficking in firearms, their parts and components and ammunition supplementing the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organised Crime (UN Firearms Protocol), and establishing export authorisation, and import and transit measures for firearms, their parts and components and ammunition
Directive 2009/43/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 6 May 2009 simplifying terms and conditions of transfers of defence-related products within the Community

OJ L 134, 29.5.2009, p. 1
2 OJ L 256, 13.9.1991, p. 51
3 OJ L 94, 30.3.2012, p. 1
4 OJ L 146, 10.6.2009, p. 1
& /en 450  Council Regulation (EC) No 1236/2005 of 27 June 2005 concerning trade in certain goods which could be used for capital punishment, torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment
Council Regulation (EU) No 36/2012 of 18 January 2012 concerning restrictive measures in view of the situation in Syria and repealing Regulation (EU) No 442/2011
Council Regulation (EC) No 1210/2003 of 7 July 2003 concerning certain specific restrictions on economic and financial relations with Iraq and repealing Regulation (EC) No 2465/96
Council Regulation (EC) No 2368/2002 of 20 December 2002 implementing the Kimberley Process certification scheme for the international trade in rough diamonds
Restrictive measures in force based on Article 215 TFEU
________________
OJ L 200, 30.7.2005, p. 1
2 OJ L 16, 19.1.2012, p. 1
3 OJ L 169, 8.7.2003, p. 6
4 OJ L 358, 31.12.2002, p. 28.
& /en 451 ANNEX 6
PROVISIONS OF UNION LAW REFERRED TO IN ARTICLE 9
1. Value Added Tax
Council Directive 2006/112/EC of 28 November 2006 on the common system of value added tax
Council Directive 2008/9/EC of 12 February 2008 laying down detailed rules for the refund of value added tax, provided for in Directive 2006/112/EC, to taxable persons not established in the Member State of refund but established in another Member State
Council Regulation (EU) No 904/2010 of 7 October 2010 on administrative cooperation and combating fraud in the field of value added tax
Council Directive 2010/24/EU of 16 March 2010 concerning mutual assistance for the recovery of claims relating to taxes, duties and other measures

The headings and subheadings in this Annex are purely indicative.
OJ L 347, 11.12.2006, p.
.
OJ L 44, 20.2.2008, p. 23
4 OJ L 268, 12.10.2018, p.
.
OJ L 84, 31.3.2010, p.
.
& /en 452  Thirteenth Council Directive 86/560/EEC of 17 November 1986 on the harmonization of the laws of the Member States relating to turnover taxes
Arrangements for the refund of value added tax to taxable persons not established in Community territory
Council Directive 2007/74/EC of 20 December 2007 on the exemption from value added tax and excise duty of goods imported by persons travelling from third countries
Council Directive 2009/132/EC of 19 October 2009 determining the scope of Article 143(b) and (c) of Directive 2006/112/EC as regards exemption from value added tax on the final importation of certain goods
Council Directive 2006/79/EC of 5 October 2006 on the exemption from taxes of imports of small consignments of goods of a non-commercial character from third countries
Obligations stemming from the Agreement between the European Union and the Kingdom of Norway on administrative cooperation, combating fraud and recovery of claims in the field of value added tax

OJ L 326, 21.11.1986, p. 40
2 OJ L 346, 29.12.2007, p. 6
3 OJ L 292, 10.11.2009, p. 5
4 OJ L 286, 17.10.2006, p. 15
5 OJ L 195, 1.8.2018, p. 1
& /en 453  Obligations stemming from the Cooperation agreement between the European Community and its Member States, of the one part, and the Swiss Confederation, of the other part, to combat fraud and any other illegal activity to the detriment of their financial interests
2.
xcise
Council Directive 2008/118/EC of 16 December 2008 concerning the general arrangements for excise duty and repealing Directive 92/12/EEC
Council Regulation (EU) No 389/2012 of 2 May 2012 on administrative cooperation in the field of excise duties and repealing Regulation (EC) No 2073/2004
Council Directive 2010/24/EU of 16 March 2010 concerning mutual assistance for the recovery of claims relating to taxes, duties and other measures
Council Directive 92/83/EEC of 19 October 1992 on the harmonization of the structures of excise duties on alcohol and alcoholic beverages

OJ L 46, 17.2.2009, p. 8
2 OJ L 9, 14.1.2009, p.12
3 OJ L 121, 8.5.2012, p.1
4 OJ L 84, 31.3.2010, p.1
5 OJ L 316, 31.10.1992, p. 21
& /en 454  Council Directive 92/84/EEC of 19 October 1992 on the approximation of the rates of excise duty on alcohol and alcoholic beverages
Council Directive 2011/64/EU of 21 June 2011 on the structure and rates of excise duty applied to manufactured tobacco
Council Directive 2003/96/EC of 27 October 2003 restructuring the Community framework for the taxation of energy products and electricity
Council Directive 95/60/EC of 27 November 1995 on fiscal marking of gas oils and kerosene
Decision No 1152/2003/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 June 2003 on computerising the movement and surveillance of excisable products

OJ L 316, 31.10.1992, p. 29
2 OJ L 176, 5.7.2011, p. 24
3 OJ L 283, 31.10.2003, p. 51
4 OJ L 291, 6.12.1995, p. 46
5 OJ L 162, 1.7.2003, p.5
& /en 455  Council Directive 2007/74/EC of 20 December 2007 on the exemption from value added tax and excise duty of goods imported by persons travelling from third countries
Council Directive 2006/79/EC of 5 October 2006 on the exemption from taxes of imports of small consignments of goods of a non-commercial character from third countries
_______________
OJ L 346, 29.12.2007, p. 6
2 OJ L 286, 17.10.2006, p. 15
& /en 456 ANNEX 7
PROVISIONS OF UNION LAW REFERRED TO IN ARTICLE 11
The following acts shall apply to and in the United Kingdom in respect of Northern Ireland insofar as they apply to the generation, transmission, distribution, and supply of electricity, trading in wholesale electricity or cross-border exchanges in electricity.
Provisions relating to retail markets and consumer protection shall not apply. References to a provision of another Union act in the acts listed in this Annex shall not render the provision referred to applicable where it does not otherwise apply to and in the United Kingdom in respect of Northern Ireland, unless it is a provision governing wholesale electricity markets which applies in Ireland and is necessary for the joint operation of the single wholesale electricity market in Ireland and Northern Ireland.
Directive 2009/72/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 July 2009 concerning common rules for the internal market in electricity and repealing Directive 2003/54/EC

OJ L 211, 14.8.2009, p. 55
& /en 457  Regulation (EC) No 714/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 July 2009 on conditions for access to the network for cross-border exchanges in electricity and repealing Regulation (EC) No 1228/2003
Regulation (EC) No 713/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 July 2009 establishing an Agency for the Cooperation of Energy Regulators
Directive 2005/89/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 January 2006 concerning measures to safeguard security of electricity supply and infrastructure investment
Regulation (EU) No 1227/2011 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 October 2011 on wholesale energy market integrity and transparency
Directive 2010/75/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 November 2010 on industrial emissions (integrated pollution prevention and control)
Directive 2003/87/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 October 2003 establishing a scheme for greenhouse gas emission allowance trading within the Community and amending Council Directive 96/61/EC
________________
OJ L 211, 14.8.2009, p. 15
2 OJ L 211, 14.8.2009, p. 1
3 OJ L 33, 4.2.2006, p. 22
4 OJ L 326, 8.12.2011, p. 1
5 OJ L 334, 17.12.2010, p. 17
6 OJ L 275, 25.10.2003, p. 32
& /en 458 ANNEX 8
PROVISIONS OF UNION LAW  REFERRED TO IN ARTICLE 12(1) OF THE PROTOCOL  AND ARTICLE 7(1) OF ANNEX 4
1. State Aid rules in the TFEU
Article 107 TFEU
Article 108 TFEU
Article 109 TFEU
Article 106 TFEU5, in so far as it concerns State aid
Article 93 TFEU

The headings and subheadings in this annex are purely indicative.
OJ C 115, 9.5.2008, p. 91
3 OJ C 115, 9.5.2008, p. 92
4 OJ C 115, 9.5.2008, p. 93
5 OJ C 115, 9.5.2008, p. 90
6 OJ C 115, 9.5.2008, p. 86
& /en 459 2. Acts referring to the notion of aid
Commission notice on the notion of State aid
Communication from the Commission on the application of the European Union State aid rules to compensation granted for the provision of services of general economic interest
Commission Notice on the application of Articles 87 and 88 of the EC Treaty to State aid in the form of guarantees
3. Block exemption regulations
3.1 Enabling regulation
Council Regulation (EU) 2015/1588 of 13 July 2015 on the application of Articles 107 and 108 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union to certain categories of horizontal State aid

OJ C 262, 19.7.2016, p. 1
2 OJ C 8, 11.1.2012, p. 4
3 OJ C 155, 20.6.2008, p. 10
4 OJ L 248, 24.9.2015, p. 1
& /en 460 3.2 General block exemption
Commission Regulation (EU) No 651/2014 of 17 June 2014 declaring certain categories of aid compatible with the internal market in application of Articles 107 and 108 of the Treaty
3.3 Sectorial block exemption regulations
Commission Regulation (EU) No 702/2014 of 25 June 2014 declaring certain categories of aid in the agricultural and forestry sectors and in rural areas compatible with the internal market in application of Articles 107 and 108 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union
Commission Regulation (EU) No 1388/2014 of 16 December 2014 declaring certain categories of aid to undertakings active in the production, processing and marketing of fishery and aquaculture products compatible with the internal market in application of Articles 107 and 108 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union

OJ L 187, 26.6.2014, p. 1
2 OJ L 193, 1.7.2014, p. 1
3 OJ L 369, 24.12.2014, p. 37
& /en 461  Regulation (EC) No 1370/2007 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 October 2007 on public passenger transport services by rail and by road and repealing Council Regulations (EEC) Nos 1191/69 and 1107/70
Communication from the Commission on interpretative guidelines concerning Regulation (EC) No 1370/2007 on public passenger transport services by rail and by road
Commission Decision of 20 December 2011 on the application of Article 106(2) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union to State aid in the form of public service compensation granted to certain undertakings entrusted with the operation of services of general economic interest
3.4 De minimis aid regulations
Commission Regulation (EU) No 1407/2013 of 18 December 2013 on the application of Articles 107 and 108 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union to de minimis aid

OJ L 315, 3.12.2007, p. 1
2 OJ C 92 of 29.3.2014, p. 1
3 OJ L 7, 11.1.2012, p. 3
4 OJ L 352, 24.12.2013, p. 1
& /en 462  Commission Regulation (EU) No 360/2012 of 25 April 2012 on the application of Articles 107 and 108 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union to de minimis aid granted to undertakings providing services of general economic interest
Commission Regulation (EU) No 1408/2013 of 18 December 2013 on the application of Articles 107 and 108 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union to de minimis aid in the agriculture sector
Commission Regulation (EU) No 717/2014 of 27 June 2014 on the application of Articles 107 and 108 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union to de minimis aid in the fishery and aquaculture sector
4. Procedural rules
Council Regulation (EU) 2015/1589 of 13 July 2015 laying down detailed rules for the application of Article 108 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union

OJ L 114, 26.4.2012, p. 8
2 OJ L 352, 24.12.2013, p. 9
3
OJ L 190, 28.6.2014, p. 45.
OJ L 248, 24.9.2015, p. 9
& /en 463  Commission Regulation (EC) No 794/2004 of 21 April 2004 implementing Council Regulation (EC) No 659/1999 laying down detailed rules for the application of Article 93 of the EC Treaty
Notice from the Commission  Towards an effective implementation of Commission decisions ordering Member States to recover unlawful and incompatible State aid
Commission notice on the determination of the applicable rules for the assessment of unlawful State aid
Commission notice on the enforcement of State aid law by national courts
Communication from Commission on the revision of the method for setting the reference and discount rates
Communication from the Commission
Code of Best Practice for the conduct of State aid control procedures

OJ L 140, 30.4.2004, p. 1
2 OJ C 272, 15.11.2007, p. 4
3 OJ C 119, 22.5.2002, p. 22
4 OJ C 85, 9.4.2009, p. 1.
OJ C 14, 19.1.2008, p. 6
6 OJ reference to be added once published
& /en 464  Commission communication C (2003) 4582 of 1 December 2003 on professional secrecy in State aid decisions
5. Compatibility rules
5.1 Important Projects of Common European Interest
Communication from the Commission  Criteria for the analysis of the compatibility with the internal market of State aid to promote the execution of important projects of common European interest
5.2 Agricultural aid
European Union guidelines for State aid in the agricultural and forestry sectors and in rural areas 2014  2020
5.3 Fisheries and aquaculture aid
Communication from the Commission  Guidelines for the examination of State aid to the fishery and aquaculture sector

OJ C 297, 9.12.2003, p. 6.
OJ C 188, 20.6.2014, p. 4.
OJ C 204, 1.7.2014, p. 1.
OJ C 217, 2.7.2015, p. 1.
& /en 465 5.4 Regional aid
Guidelines on regional State aid for 2014-2020
5.5 Research and development and innovation aid
Communication from the Commission  Framework for State aid for research and development and innovation
5.6 Risk capital aid
Communication from the Commission  Guidelines on State aid to promote risk finance investments
5.7 Rescue and restructuring aid
Communication from the Commission  Guidelines on State aid for rescuing and restructuring non-financial undertakings in difficulty

OJ C 209/01, 23.7.2013, p.1
2 OJ C 198, 27.6.2014, p. 1
3 OJ C 19, 22.1.2014, p. 4
4 OJ C 249, 31.7.2014, p.1
& /en 466 5.8 Training aid
Communication from the Commission  Criteria for the compatibility analysis of training state aid cases subject to individual notification
5.9 Employment aid
Communication from the Commission  Criteria for the compatibility analysis of state aid to disadvantaged and disabled workers subject to individual notification
5.10 Temporary rules in response to the economic and financial crisis
Communication from the Commission on the application, from 1 August 2013, of State aid rules to support measures in favour of banks in the context of the financial crisis
Communication from the Commission on the treatment of impaired assets in the Community banking sector

OJ C 188, 11.8.2009, p. 1
2 OJ C 188, 11.8.2009, p. 6
3 OJ C 216, 30.7.2013, p. 1
4 OJ C 72, 26.3.2009, p. 1
& /en 467  Commission communication on the return to viability and the assessment of restructuring measures in the financial sector in the current crisis under the State aid rules
5.11 Export credit insurance
Communication from the Commission to the Member States on the application of Articles 107 and 108 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union to short-term export-credit insurance
5.12 Energy and environment
5.12.1 Environmental aid and energy
Communication from the Commission  Guidelines on State aid for environmental protection and energy 2014-2020
Communication from the Commission  Guidelines on certain State aid measures in the context of the greenhouse gas emission allowance trading scheme post-2012

OJ C 195, 19.8.2009, p. 9
2 OJ C 392, 19.12.2012, p. 1
3 OJ C 200, 28.6.2014, p. 1
4 OJ C 158, 5.6.2012, p. 4
& /en 468 5.12.2 Electricity (stranded costs)
Commission Communication relating to the methodology for analysis of State aid linked to stranded costs
5.12.3 Coal
Council Decision of 10 December 2010 on State aid to facilitate the closure of uncompetitive coal mines
5.13 Basic industries and manufacturing (steel)
Communication from the Commission concerning certain aspects of the treatment of competition cases resulting from the expiry of the ECSC Treaty
5.14 Postal services
Notice from the Commission on the application of the competition rules to the postal sector and on the assessment of certain State measures relating to postal services

http://ec.europa.eu/competition/state_aid/legislation/stranded_costs_en.pdf
OJ L 336, 21.12.2010, p. 24
3 OJ C 152, 26.6.2002, p. 5
4 OJ C 39, 6.2.1998, p. 2
& /en 469 5.15 Audiovisual, broadcasting and broadband
5.15.1 Audiovisual production
Communication from the Commission on State aid for films and other audiovisual works
5.15.2 Broadcasting
Communication from the Commission on the application of State aid rules to public service broadcasting
5.15.3 Broadband network
Guidelines for the application of state aid rules in relation to the rapid deployment of broadband networks

OJ C 332, 15.11.2013, p. 1
2 OJ C 257, 27.10.2009, p. 1
3 OJ C 25, 26.1.2013, p. 1
& /en 470 5.16 Transport and infrastructure
Communication from the Commission
Community guidelines on State aid for railway undertakings
Community guidelines on State aid to maritime transport
Communication from the Commission providing guidance on State aid complementary to Community funding for the launching of the motorways of the sea
Communication from the Commission providing guidance on State aid to ship-management companies
Communication from the Commission  Guidelines on State aid to airports and airlines

OJ C 184, 22.7.2008, p. 13
2 OJ C 13, 17.1.2004, p. 3
3 OJ C 317, 12.12.2008, p. 10
4 OJ C 132, 11.6.2009, p. 6
5 OJ C 99, 4.4.2014, p. 3
& /en 471 5.17 Services of general economic interest (SGEI)
Communication from the Commission  European Union framework for State aid in the form of public service compensation
6. Transparency of financial relations between Member States and public undertakings
Commission Directive 2006/111/EC of 16 November 2006 on the transparency of financial relations between Member States and public undertakings as well as on financial transparency within certain undertakings
_______________
OJ C 8, 11.1.2012, p. 15
2 OJ L 318, 17.11.2006, p. 17
& /en 472 ANNEX 9
PROCEDURES REFERRED TO IN ARTICLE 12(2)
The Joint Committee shall determine the initial maximum exempted overall annual level of support and the initial minimum percentage referred to in Article 12(2), taking into account the most recent information available. The initial maximum exempted overall annual level of support shall be informed by the design of the United Kingdom's future agricultural support scheme as well as the annual average of the total amount of expenditure incurred in Northern Ireland under the Common Agricultural Policy under the current MFF 2014-2020. The initial minimum percentage shall be informed by the design of the United Kingdom's agricultural support scheme as well as by the percentage to which the overall expenditure under the Common Agricultural Policy in the Union complied with the provisions of Annex 2 to the WTO Agreement on Agriculture as notified for the period concerned.
The Joint Committee shall adjust the level of support and percentage referred to in the first subparagraph informed by the design of the United Kingdom's agricultural support scheme to any variation in the overall amount of support available under the Common Agricultural Policy in the Union in each future Multiannual Financial Framework.
& /en 473 If the Joint Committee fails to determine the initial level of support and percentage in accordance with the first subparagraph, or fails to adjust the level of support and percentage in accordance with the second subparagraph, by the end of the transition period or within one year of the entry into force of a future Multiannual Financial Framework, as the case may be, application of Article 12(2) shall be suspended until the Joint Committee has determined or adjusted the level of support and percentage.
________________
& /en 474 ANNEX 10
PROCEDURES REFERRED TO IN ARTICLE 18(3)
1. Where the Union or the United Kingdom is considering taking safeguard measures under Article 18(1) of this Protocol, it shall, without delay, notify the Union or the United Kingdom, as the case may be, through the Joint Committee and shall provide all relevant information.
2. The Union and the United Kingdom shall immediately enter into consultations in the Joint Committee with a view to finding a commonly acceptable solution.
3. The Union or the United Kingdom, as the case may be, may not take safeguard measures until one month has elapsed after the date of notification under point 1, unless the consultation procedure under point 2 has been concluded before the expiration of the state limit. When exceptional circumstances requiring immediate action exclude prior examination, the Union or the United Kingdom, as the case may be, may apply forthwith the protective measures strictly necessary to remedy the situation.
4. The Union or the United Kingdom, as the case may be, shall, without delay, notify the measures taken to the Joint Committee and shall provide all relevant information.
& /en 475 5. The safeguard measures taken shall be the subject of consultations in the Joint Committee every three months from the date of their adoption with a view to their abolition before the date of expiry envisaged, or to the limitation of their scope of application. The Union or the United Kingdom, as the case may be, may at any time request the Joint Committee to review such measures.
6. Points 1 to 5 shall apply, mutatis mutandis, to rebalancing measures referred to in Article 18(2) of this Protocol.
________________
& /en 476 PROTOCOL RELATING TO THE SOVEREIGN BASE AREAS OF THE UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND IN CYPRUS
The Union and the United Kingdom,
RECALLING that the Joint Declaration on the Sovereign Base Areas of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland in Cyprus annexed to the Final Act of the Treaty concerning the Accession of the United Kingdom to the European Communities provided that the arrangements applicable to relations between the European Economic Community and the Sovereign Base Areas will be defined within the context of any agreement between the Community and the Republic of Cyprus,
CONFIRMING that the arrangements applicable to relations between the Union and the Sovereign Base Areas after the withdrawal of the United Kingdom from the Union should continue to be defined within the framework of the Republic of Cyprus
membership of the Union,
TAKING ACCOUNT of the provisions concerning the United Kingdom Sovereign Base Areas of Akrotiri and Dhekelia ("the Sovereign Base Areas") set out in the Treaty concerning the Establishment of the Republic of Cyprus and the associated Exchanges of Notes dated 16 August 1960 ("the Treaty of Establishment"),
& /en 477 CONFIRMING that the withdrawal of the United Kingdom from the Union should not affect the rights and obligations of the Republic of Cyprus under Union law or the rights and obligations of the parties to the Treaty of Establishment,
RECALLING that, from the date of accession of the Republic of Cyprus to the Union, Union law applies in the Sovereign Base Areas only to the extent necessary to ensure the implementation of the arrangements set out in Protocol No 3 on the Sovereign Base Areas of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland in Cyprus annexed to the Act concerning the conditions of accession of the Czech Republic, the Republic of Estonia, the Republic of Cyprus, the Republic of Latvia, the Republic of Lithuania, the Republic of Hungary, the Republic of Malta, the Republic of Poland, the Republic of Slovenia and the Slovak Republic and the adjustments to the Treaties on which the European Union is founded ("Protocol No 3"),
NOTING the Exchange of Notes between the Government of the United Kingdom and the Government of the Republic of Cyprus concerning the administration of the Sovereign Base Areas, dated 16 August 1960, and the attached Declaration by the United Kingdom Government that one of the main objects to be achieved is the protection of the interests of those resident or working in the Sovereign Base Areas, and considering in this context that those persons should have, to the extent possible, the same treatment as those resident or working in the Republic of Cyprus,
& /en 478 NOTING the commitment of the United Kingdom to preserving the application of the arrangements made pursuant to the Treaty of Establishment whereby the authorities of the Republic of Cyprus administer a wide range of public services in the Sovereign Base Areas, including in the fields of agriculture, customs and taxation,
WHEREAS the Sovereign Base Areas should remain part of the customs territory of the Union after the withdrawal of the United Kingdom from the Union,
NOTING the provisions of the Treaty of Establishment regarding customs arrangements between the Sovereign Base Areas and the Republic of Cyprus and in particular those of Part I of Annex F to that Treaty,
NOTING the commitment of the United Kingdom not to create customs posts or other frontier barriers between the Sovereign Base Areas and the Republic of Cyprus and not to establish commercial or civilian seaports or airports,
DESIRING to determine appropriate arrangements for achieving the objectives of the arrangements set out in Protocol No 3 after the withdrawal of the United Kingdom from the Union,
CONSIDERING that the arrangements set out in this Protocol should ensure the proper implementation and enforcement of the relevant provisions of Union law in relation to the Sovereign Base Areas after the withdrawal of the United Kingdom from the Union,
& /en 479 CONSIDERING that appropriate arrangements need to be laid down as regards the relief and exemptions from duties and taxes that the armed forces of the United Kingdom and associated personnel can maintain after the withdrawal of the United Kingdom from the Union,
RECOGNISING that it is necessary to provide for specific arrangements for the checks on goods and persons crossing the external borders of the Sovereign Base Areas, as well as to provide for the terms under which the relevant provisions of Union law apply to the line between the areas in which the Government of the Republic of Cyprus does not exercise effective control and the Sovereign Base Area of Dhekelia, as currently provided on the basis of the Protocol No 10 on Cyprus annexed to the Act concerning the conditions of accession of the Czech Republic, the Republic of Estonia, the Republic of Cyprus, the Republic of Latvia, the Republic of Lithuania, the Republic of Hungary, the Republic of Malta, the Republic of Poland, the Republic of Slovenia and the Slovak Republic and the adjustments to the Treaties on which the European Union is founded ("Protocol No 10"),
RECOGNISING that cooperation between the Republic of Cyprus and the United Kingdom is essential to ensure the effective implementation of the arrangements laid down in this Protocol,
CONSIDERING that on the basis of the arrangements laid down in this Protocol, Union law will apply in relation to the Sovereign Base Areas in certain policy areas of the Union following the withdrawal of the United Kingdom from the Union,
& /en 480 RECOGNISING the unique arrangements relating to persons living and working in the Sovereign Base Areas under the Treaty of Establishment and the 1960 Declaration and the objective of the consistent application of relevant Union law in both the Republic of Cyprus and the Sovereign Base Areas in order to support those arrangements,
NOTING in this regard that through this Protocol the United Kingdom entrusts the Republic of Cyprus, as a Member State of the Union, with responsibility for implementing and enforcing provisions of Union law in the Sovereign Base Areas as provided for in this Protocol,
RECALLING that the Republic of Cyprus is responsible for the implementation and enforcement of Union law in relation to goods destined for or originating in the Sovereign Base Areas that are entering or leaving through a seaport or airport in the Republic of Cyprus,
UNDERLINING that the arrangements set out in this Protocol are without prejudice to Articles 1 and 2 of the Treaty of Establishment and to the positions of the Republic of Cyprus and the United Kingdom thereon,
CONSIDERING that the arrangements laid down in this Protocol should have the sole purpose of regulating the particular situation of the Sovereign Base Areas and should not apply to any other territory or serve as a precedent,
HAVE AGREED UPON the following provisions, which shall be annexed to the Agreement on the withdrawal of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland from the European Union and the European Atomic Energy Community ("Withdrawal Agreement"):
& /en 481 ARTICLE
General provisions
1. For the purposes of this Protocol, any reference to the United Kingdom in the applicable provisions of the Withdrawal Agreement shall be understood as referring to the United Kingdom in respect of the Sovereign Base Areas. Titles I, II and III of Part Three and Part Six thereof shall apply without prejudice to the provisions of this Protocol.
2. By way of derogation from Article 4(4) and (5) of the Withdrawal Agreement, the provisions of this Protocol referring to Union law or concepts or provisions thereof shall in their implementation and application be interpreted in conformity with the relevant case law of the Court of Justice of the European Union.
3. Notwithstanding Article 71 of the Withdrawal Agreement, in addition to any provisions of Union law on the protection of personal data applicable to and in the Sovereign Base Areas under this Protocol, Regulation (EU) 2016/679 and Directive (EU) 2016/680 shall apply in respect of personal data processed in the Sovereign Base Areas on the basis of this Protocol.
& /en 482 4. By way of derogation from Article 6(1) of the Withdrawal Agreement, where this Protocol makes reference to a Union act, the reference to that act shall be understood as referring to the act as amended or replaced. This paragraph shall not apply in relation to Article 4(3) and (10) of the Council Regulation (EC) 866/20041, to which Article 10(2) shall apply.
5. Where the Union considers, by way of derogation from Articles 7 and 8 of the Withdrawal Agreement, that full or partial access by the United Kingdom, or by the United Kingdom in respect of the Sovereign Base Areas, as the case may be, is strictly necessary to enable the United Kingdom to comply with its obligations under this Protocol, including where such access is necessary because access to the relevant information cannot be facilitated by other practical means, references to Member States and competent authorities of Member States in provisions of Union law made applicable by this Protocol shall be understood as including the United Kingdom or the United Kingdom in respect of the Sovereign Base Areas, as the case may be in relation to access to any network, information system or database established on the basis of Union law.

Council Regulation (EC) No 866/2004 of 29 April 2004 on a regime under Article 2 of Protocol No 10 of the Act of Accession (OJ L 161, 30.4.2004, p. 128).
& /en 483 ARTICLE
Customs territory of the Union
1. The Sovereign Base Areas, taking into account the Treaty of Establishment, shall be part of the customs territory of the Union. For this purpose, the provisions of Union law on customs and the common commercial policy, including provisions of Union law providing for customs controls of specific goods or for specific purposes, shall apply to and in the Sovereign Base Areas.
2. Goods produced by producers in the Sovereign Base Areas and placed on the market in the customs territory of the Union shall be considered to be goods in free circulation.
3. All goods intended for use in the Sovereign Base Areas shall enter the island of Cyprus through the civilian airports and seaports of the Republic of Cyprus, and all customs formalities, customs controls and collection of import duties related to them shall be carried out by the authorities of the Republic of Cyprus.
4. All goods intended for export shall exit the island of Cyprus through the civilian airports and seaports of the Republic of Cyprus and all customs export formalities and customs controls related to them shall be carried out by the authorities of the Republic of Cyprus.
5. Customs controls on documents and equipment referred to in paragraph 3 of section 11 of Annex C to the Treaty of Establishment shall be carried out in accordance with the provisions of that section.
& /en 484 6. By way of derogation from paragraphs 3 and 4, and with the sole purpose of supporting the operation of the Sovereign Base Areas as military bases, having regard to the Treaty of Establishment, the following provisions shall apply:
(a)
he following goods may enter or leave the island of Cyprus through a seaport or airport in the Sovereign Base Areas, subject to all customs formalities, customs controls and collection of duties related to those goods being carried out by the authorities of the Sovereign Base Areas:
(i) goods imported or exported for official or military purposes;
(ii) goods imported or exported in personal baggage, exclusively for their personal use, by or on behalf of United Kingdom personnel, as well as by other persons travelling on defence or official business
(b)
arcels which are sent or received by United Kingdom personnel or their dependants and transported by the British Forces Post Office may enter or leave the island of Cyprus through a port or airport in the Sovereign Base Areas under the following conditions:
(i) incoming parcels addressed to United Kingdom personnel or their dependants shall be transported in a sealed container and conveyed following their arrival to a customs post in the Republic of Cyprus so that the completion of customs formalities, controls and the collection of import duties related to those products can be carried out by the authorities of the Republic of Cyprus;
& /en 485 (ii) outgoing parcels sent by United Kingdom personnel or their dependants shall be subject to customs control by the authorities of the Sovereign Base Areas.
For the purposes of this paragraph, "United Kingdom personnel or their dependants
means the persons defined in paragraph 1 of Part I of Annex B to the Treaty of Establishment.
The United Kingdom shall share relevant information with the Republic of Cyprus with a view to cooperating closely to prevent the evasion of duties and taxes, including smuggling.
7. Articles 34, 35 and 36 TFEU and other provisions of Union law on goods, in particular measures adopted pursuant to Article 114 TFEU, shall apply to and in the Sovereign Base Areas.
8. Goods arriving from the areas of the Republic of Cyprus in which the Government of the Republic of Cyprus does not exercise effective control shall cross the line between those areas and the Eastern Sovereign Base Area in accordance with Regulation (EC) No 866/2004.
Without prejudice to Article 6 of this Protocol, the United Kingdom shall be responsible for the implementation and enforcement of Regulation (EC) No 866/2004 in relation to the Sovereign Base Areas in accordance with the provisions of that Regulation. The United Kingdom shall invite the authorities of the Republic of Cyprus to conduct any necessary veterinary, phytosanitary and food safety checks required under that Regulation.
& /en 486 9. The United Kingdom shall be responsible for the implementation and enforcement of the provisions of Union law referred to in paragraph 1 in relation to goods arriving in or leaving the Sovereign Base Areas under paragraph 6.
The United Kingdom shall also be responsible for issuing any licences, authorisations or certificates which may be required in respect of goods covered by paragraph 1 of section 5 of Annex F to the Treaty of Establishment.
10. The Republic of Cyprus shall be responsible for the implementation and enforcement in the Sovereign Base Areas of the provisions of Union law referred to in paragraph 7.
ARTICLE
Taxation
1. The provisions of Union law on turnover taxes, excise duties and other forms of indirect taxation adopted pursuant to Article 113 TFEU shall apply to and in the Sovereign Base Areas.
2. Transactions originating in or intended for the Sovereign Base Areas shall be treated as transactions originating in or intended for the Republic of Cyprus for the purposes of value added tax (VAT), excise duties and other forms of indirect taxation.
& /en 487 3. The Republic of Cyprus shall be responsible for the implementation and the enforcement of the provisions of Union law referred to in this Article in the Sovereign Base Areas, including for the collection of duties and taxes payable by civil natural or legal persons residing or established in the Sovereign Base Areas.
ARTICLE
Duty relief
1. Goods or services received, acquired or imported for use by the armed forces of the United Kingdom or the civilian staff accompanying them, or for supplying their messes or canteens, shall be exempted from customs duties, VAT and excise duties, provided that the persons concerned are eligible for such exemptions in accordance with the Treaty of Establishment. For this purpose, the United Kingdom shall issue exemption certificates upon approval by the Republic of Cyprus in relation to the goods covered by Article 2(3).
2. Any duties that may be collected by the United Kingdom authorities in the Sovereign Base Areas as a result of sale of the goods referred to in paragraph 1 shall be remitted to the authorities of the Republic of Cyprus.
& /en 488 ARTICLE
Social security
With a view to the continued protection of the rights of persons resident or employed in the territory of the Sovereign Base Areas, the United Kingdom and the Republic of Cyprus shall make further arrangements, where necessary, to ensure the proper implementation of Article 4 of Protocol No 3 after the end of the transition period.
ARTICLE
Agriculture, fisheries and veterinary and phytosanitary rules
The provisions of Union law on agriculture and fisheries in Title III of Part Three TFEU and acts adopted pursuant to those provisions, as well as the veterinary and phytosanitary rules adopted in particular pursuant to point (b) of Article 168(4) TFEU, shall apply to and in the Sovereign Base Areas.
The Republic of Cyprus shall be responsible for the implementation and enforcement of the provisions of Union law referred to in the first paragraph in the Sovereign Base Areas.
& /en 489 ARTICLE
Checks on persons crossing the external borders of the Sovereign Base Areas
1. For the purposes of this Article, "external borders of the Sovereign Base Areas
means the sea boundaries and the airports and seaports of the Sovereign Base Areas, but not their land and sea boundaries with the Republic of Cyprus. Subject to paragraph 6, for the purposes of paragraphs 2 and 7, "crossing points" means any crossing point authorised by the authorities of the United Kingdom for the crossing of the external borders of the Sovereign Base Areas.
2. The United Kingdom shall carry out checks on persons crossing the external borders of the Sovereign Base Areas. Those checks shall include the verification of travel documents. All persons shall undergo at least one such check in order to establish their identity. The United Kingdom shall only allow the external borders of the Sovereign Base Areas to be crossed at crossing points.
3. Nationals of third countries and nationals of the United Kingdom shall only be permitted to cross the external borders of the Sovereign Base Areas if they fulfil the following conditions:
(a) they possess a valid travel document;
(b) they are in possession of a valid visa for the Republic of Cyprus, if required;
(c) they are engaged in a defence-related activity or are family members of a person who is engaged in such activity; and
& /en 490 (d) they are not a threat to national security.
The condition specified in point (c) shall not apply to United Kingdom nationals crossing the boundary referred to in paragraph 6.
The United Kingdom may only derogate from the conditions referred to in the first subparagraph on humanitarian grounds, on grounds of national interest or in order to comply with its international obligations.
Members of a force, civilian component and dependants, as defined in Annex C to the Treaty of Establishment, shall be treated as not requiring a visa for the Republic of Cyprus.
4. Any applicant for asylum who first entered the island of Cyprus from outside the Union by one of the Sovereign Base Areas shall be taken back or readmitted to the Sovereign Base Areas at the request of the Member State in whose territory the applicant is present.
The Republic of Cyprus shall continue to cooperate with the United Kingdom with a view to devising practical ways and means of respecting the rights and satisfying the needs of asylum seekers and illegal migrants in the Sovereign Base Areas, bearing in mind humanitarian considerations and in compliance with the relevant Sovereign Base Area Administration legislation.
5. Without prejudice to paragraph 6, there shall be no checks on persons at the land and sea boundaries between the Sovereign Base Areas and the Republic of Cyprus.
& /en 491 6. The boundary between the Eastern Sovereign Base Area and those areas of the Republic of Cyprus in which the Government of the Republic of Cyprus does not exercise effective control shall be treated as part of the external borders of the Sovereign Base Areas for the purposes of this Article for the duration of the suspension of the application of the acquis according to Article 1 of Protocol No 10. That boundary may only be crossed at the crossing points of Strovilia and Pergamos. With the prior agreement of and in cooperation with the United Kingdom authorities, the Republic of Cyprus may take further measures to combat illegal migration with respect to persons who have crossed that boundary.
7. The United Kingdom authorities shall use mobile units to carry out external border surveillance between border crossing points and at crossing points outside of normal opening hours at the external borders of the Sovereign Base Areas and at the boundary between the Sovereign Base Area of Dhekelia and those areas of the Republic of Cyprus in which the Government of the Republic of Cyprus does not exercise effective control. That surveillance shall be carried out in such a way as to discourage persons from circumventing the checks at crossing points. The United Kingdom authorities shall deploy enough suitably qualified officers to carry out those checks and surveillance.
8. The United Kingdom authorities shall maintain constant close cooperation with the authorities of the Republic of Cyprus with a view to the effective implementation of the checks and surveillance referred to in paragraphs 6 and 7.
& /en 492 ARTICLE
Cooperation
The Republic of Cyprus and the United Kingdom shall cooperate to ensure the effective implementation of this Protocol, in particular with a view to countering fraud and any other illegal activities that affect the financial interests of the Union or of the United Kingdom. The Republic of Cyprus and the United Kingdom may make further arrangements concerning the implementation of any of the provisions of this Protocol. The Republic of Cyprus shall inform the European Commission of any such arrangements before their entry into force.
ARTICLE
Specialised Committee
1. The Specialised Committee on issues related to the implementation of the Protocol related to the Sovereign Base Areas in Cyprus established by Article 165 of the Withdrawal Agreement ("Specialised Committee") shall:
(a) facilitate the implementation and application of this Protocol;
(b) discuss any point of relevance to this Protocol giving rise to a difficulty and raised by the Union or the United Kingdom; and
& /en 493 (c) make recommendations to the Joint Committee as regards the functioning of this Protocol, in particular proposals for amendments of the references to Union law in this Protocol.
2. The European Commission shall inform the Specialised Committee of any report submitted under Article 11 of Regulation (EC) No 866/2004 and shall consult the United Kingdom in relation to any Commission proposal to adopt an act amending or replacing that Regulation if the Sovereign Base Areas are affected.
ARTICLE 10
Joint Committee
1. The Joint Committee shall amend any references to Union law in this Protocol on a recommendation from the Specialised Committee.
2. If it considers it is necessary in order to maintain the good functioning of this Protocol, the Joint Committee may, on a recommendation from the Specialised Committee, take any decision necessary to replace in relation to this Protocol the provisions referred to in Article 1(4).
3. The Joint Committee may, on a recommendation from the Specialised Committee, amend Article 7(6) in relation to the crossing points identified in that provision.
& /en 494 ARTICLE 11
Operation of Article 6 of Protocol No 3 during the transition period
Notwithstanding Article 127(1) of the Withdrawal Agreement, any measures adopted during the transition period under Article 6 of Protocol No 3 shall not apply to or in the Sovereign Base Areas.
ARTICLE 12
Supervision and enforcement
1. In respect of the Sovereign Base Areas and in relation to natural and legal persons residing or established in the territory of those Areas, the institutions, bodies, offices and agencies of the Union shall have the powers conferred upon them by Union law in relation to this Protocol and provisions of Union law made applicable by it. In particular, the Court of Justice of the European Union shall have jurisdiction as provided for in the Treaties in this respect.
2. Acts of the institutions, bodies, offices and agencies adopted in accordance with paragraph 1 shall produce the same legal effects with regard to and in the Sovereign Base Areas as those which they produce within the Union and its Member States.
& /en 495 ARTICLE 13
Responsibility for implementation
1. Unless otherwise provided in this Protocol, the United Kingdom shall be responsible for the implementation and enforcement of this Protocol in the Sovereign Base Areas. Notwithstanding paragraph 3, the competent authorities of the United Kingdom shall enact the domestic legislation necessary to give effect to this Protocol in the Sovereign Base Areas.
2. The United Kingdom shall retain the exclusive right to implement and enforce this Protocol in respect of its own authorities or on any immovable property owned or occupied by the Ministry of Defence of the United Kingdom, as well as any coercive enforcement power requiring the power to enter a dwelling house or a power of arrest. The United Kingdom shall retain other coercive enforcement powers unless otherwise provided in the legislation referred to in paragraph 1.
3. The Republic of Cyprus is entrusted with the responsibility for implementing and enforcing this Protocol in the Sovereign Base Areas in accordance with Article 2(10) and Articles 3 and 6.
& /en 496 PROTOCOL ON GIBRALTAR
The Union and the United Kingdom,
RECALLING that the United Kingdom is responsible for Gibraltar's external relations, and that Union law is applicable to Gibraltar to the extent provided in the 1972 Act of Accession by virtue of Article 355(3) TFEU,
RECALLING that this Protocol is to be implemented in accordance with the respective constitutional orders of the Kingdom of Spain and of the United Kingdom,
RECALLING that, pursuant to Article 50 TEU, in conjunction with Article 106a of the Euratom Treaty, and subject to the arrangements laid down in the Agreement on the withdrawal of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland from the European Union and the European Atomic Energy Community ("Withdrawal Agreement"), the law of the European Union and of Euratom in its entirety ceases, to apply to the United Kingdom, and therefore to Gibraltar, from the date of entry into force of the Withdrawal Agreement,
CONSIDERING that it is necessary to ensure an orderly withdrawal from the Union in relation to Gibraltar,
& /en 497 STRESSING that the orderly withdrawal of the United Kingdom from the Union in relation to Gibraltar implies that any potential negative effect on the close social and economic relations between Gibraltar and the surrounding area, in particular the territory of the municipalities that make up the Mancomunidad de Municipios del Campo de Gibraltar in the Kingdom of Spain, is adequately addressed,
TAKING NOTE of the commitment of the United Kingdom in respect of Gibraltar to address the payment of benefits in a satisfactory manner by 31 December 2020,
AIMING at continuing to promote balanced economic and social development in the area, in particular in terms of labour conditions, and continuing to ensure the highest levels of environmental protection in accordance with Union law, as well as continuing to strengthen security for the inhabitants of the area, in particular through cooperation in police and customs matters,
ACKNOWLEDGING the benefits for the economic development of the area arising from the free movement of persons under Union law, which will continue to apply during the transition period,
REAFFIRMING in particular the ambition to protect public health, and highlighting the necessity to fight against the serious health, social, and economic consequences of smoking,
EMPHASISING also the need to combat fraud and smuggling and to protect the financial interests of all the parties concerned,
& /en 498 UNDERLINING that this Protocol is without prejudice to the respective legal positions of the Kingdom of Spain and the United Kingdom with regard to sovereignty and jurisdiction,
TAKING NOTE of the Memoranda of Understanding concluded between the Kingdom of Spain and the United Kingdom on [xx
November 2018 in relation to citizens' rights, tobacco and other products, cooperation on environmental matters and cooperation in police and customs matters, as well as the agreement reached on [xx
November 2018 to conclude a treaty on taxation and the protection of financial interests,
HAVE AGREED UPON the following provisions, which shall be annexed to the Withdrawal Agreement:
& /en 499 ARTICLE
Citizens' rights
1. The Kingdom of Spain ("Spain") and the United Kingdom in respect of Gibraltar shall closely cooperate with a view to preparing and underpinning the effective implementation of Part Two of the Withdrawal Agreement on citizens
rights, which fully applies, inter alia, to frontier workers residing in Gibraltar or in Spain, in particular in the territory of the municipalities that make up the Mancomunidad de Municipios del Campo de Gibraltar, and which, in Articles 24 and 25 provide for specific rights for frontier workers.
2. To that effect, the competent authorities shall exchange up-to-date information on a quarterly basis on persons covered by Part Two of the Withdrawal Agreement who reside in Gibraltar or in the territory of the municipalities that make up the Mancomunidad de Municipios del Campo de Gibraltar, including, in particular, frontier workers.
3. Spain and the United Kingdom shall establish a coordinating committee as a forum for regular discussion between the competent authorities to monitor matters relating to employment and labour conditions. That coordinating committee shall report to the Committee on issues related to the implementation of the Protocol on Gibraltar established by Article 165 of the Withdrawal Agreement ("Specialised Committee") on a regular basis.
& /en 500 ARTICLE
Air transport law
Union law on air transport which did not apply to the Gibraltar airport before 30 March 2019 shall only become applicable to the Gibraltar airport from the date established by the Joint Committee. The Joint Committee shall adopt the decision thereon upon notification by the United Kingdom and Spain that they have reached a satisfactory agreement on the use of the Gibraltar airport.
ARTICLE
Fiscal matters and protection of financial interests
1. Spain and the United Kingdom in respect of Gibraltar shall establish the forms of cooperation necessary to achieve full transparency in tax matters and in respect of the protection of financial interests of all the parties concerned, in particular by establishing an enhanced system of administrative cooperation to fight against fraud, smuggling and money laundering, and to resolve tax residence conflicts.
& /en 501 2. The international standards of the Group of Twenty (G20) and of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) relating to good fiscal governance, transparency, exchanges of information and harmful tax practices and in particular the economic substance criteria established by the OECD Forum on Harmful Tax Practices shall be complied with in Gibraltar, with a view to Gibraltar's participation in the OECD Inclusive Framework on base erosion and profit shifting (BEPS).
3. The United Kingdom shall ensure that its ratification of the Framework Convention on Tobacco Control, adopted in Geneva on 21 May 2003, and the Protocol to Eliminate Illicit Trade in Tobacco Products, adopted in Seoul on 12 November 2012, is extended to Gibraltar by 30 June 2020.
Without prejudice to the first subparagraph, the United Kingdom shall ensure that a system of traceability and security measures relating to tobacco products that is equivalent to the requirements and standards of Union law is in force in Gibraltar by 30 June 2020. That system shall ensure reciprocal access to the information on traceability of cigarettes in Spain and Gibraltar.
4. In order to prevent and deter the smuggling of products subject to excise duties or special taxes, the United Kingdom shall ensure that, in respect of alcohol and petrol, a tax system which aims at preventing fraudulent activities involving those products is in force in Gibraltar.
& /en 502 ARTICLE
Environment protection and fishing
Spain and the United Kingdom shall establish a coordinating committee as a forum for regular discussion between the competent authorities of issues concerning in particular waste management, air quality, scientific research and fishing. The Union shall be invited to participate in the meetings of that coordinating committee. That coordinating committee shall report to the Specialised Committee on a regular basis.
ARTICLE
Cooperation in police and customs matters
Spain and the United Kingdom shall establish a coordination committee as a forum for monitoring and for coordination between the competent authorities of any questions related to cooperation in police and customs matters. The Union shall be invited to participate in the meetings of that coordination committee. That coordinating committee shall report to the Specialised Committee on a regular basis.
& /en 503 ARTICLE
Tasks of the Specialised Committee
The Specialised Committee shall:
(a) facilitate the implementation and application of this Protocol;
(b) discuss any point of relevance to this Protocol giving rise to a difficulty and raised by the Union or the United Kingdom;
(c) examine the reports from the coordination committees referred to in this Protocol; and
(d) make recommendations to the Joint Committee as regards the functioning of this Protocol.
& /en 504
ANNEXES
& /en 505 ANNEX
SOCIAL SECURITY COORDINATION
PART
DECISIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE ADMINISTRATIVE COMMISSION
Applicable legislation (A series):
Decision A1 of 12 June 2009 concerning the establishment of a dialogue and conciliation procedure concerning the validity of documents, the determination of the applicable legislation and the provisions of benefits under Regulation (EC) No 883/2004 of the European Parliament and of the Council (OJ C 106, 24.4.2010, p.1);
Decision A2 of 12 June 2009 concerning the interpretation of Article 12 of Regulation (EC) No 883/2004 of the European Parliament and of the Council on the legislation applicable to posted workers and self-employed workers temporarily working outside the competent State (OJ C 106, 24.4.2010, p. 5);
& /en 506  Decision A3 of 17 December 2009 concerning the aggregation of uninterrupted posting periods completed under the Council Regulation (EEC) No 1408/71 and Regulation (EC) No 883/2004 of the European Parliament and of the Council (OJ C 149, 08.6.2010, p. 3).
Electronic Data Exchange (E series):
Decision E2 of 3 March 2010 concerning the establishment of a change management procedure applying to details of the bodies defined in Article 1 of Regulation (EC) No 883/2004 of the European Parliament and of the Council which are listed in the electronic directory which is an inherent part of EESSI (OJ C 187, 10.7.2010, p. 5);
Decision E4 of 13 March 2014 concerning the transitional period as defined in Article 95 of Regulation (EC) No 987/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council (OJ
152, 20.5.2014, p. 21);
Decision E5 of 16 March 2017 concerning the practical arrangements for the transitional period for the data exchange via electronic means referred to in Article 4 of Regulation (EC) No 987/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council (OJ C 233, 19.7.2017, p. 3).
Family benefits (F series):
Decision F1 of 12 June 2009 concerning the interpretation of Article 68 of Regulation (EC) No 883/2004 of the European Parliament and of the Council relating to priority rules in the event of overlapping of family benefits (OJ C 106, 24.4.2010, p. 11);
& /en 507  Decision F2 of 23 June 2015 concerning the exchange of data between institutions for the purpose of granting family benefits (OJ C 52, 11.2.2016, p. 11).
Horizontal issues (H series):
Decision H1 of 12 June 2009 concerning the framework for the transition from Council Regulations (EEC) No 1408/71 and (EEC) No 574/72 to Regulations (EC) No 883/2004 and (EC) No 987/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council and the application of Decisions and Recommendations of the Administrative Commission for the coordination of social security systems (OJ C 106, 24.4.2010, p. 13);
Decision H3 of 15 October 2009 concerning the date to be taken into consideration for determining the rates of conversion referred to in Article 90 of Regulation (EC) No 987/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council (OJ C 106, 24.4.2010, p. 56);
Decision H4 of 22 December 2009 concerning the composition and working methods of the Audit Board of the Administrative Commission for the Coordination of Social Security Systems (OJ C 107, 27.4.2010, p. 3);
Decision H5 of 18 March 2010 concerning cooperation on combating fraud and error within the framework of Council Regulation (EC) No 883/2004 and Regulation (EC) No 987/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council on the coordination of social security systems (OJ C 149, 8.6.2010, p. 5);
& /en 508  Decision H6 of 16 December 2010 concerning the application of certain principles regarding the aggregation of periods under Article 6 of Regulation (EC) No 883/2004 on the coordination of social security systems (OJ C 45, 12.2.2011, p. 5);
Decision H7 of 25 June 2015 on the revision of Decision H3 concerning the date to be taken into consideration for determining the rates of conversion referred to in Article 90 of Regulation (EC) No 987/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council on the coordination of social security systems (OJ C 52, 11.2.2016, p. 13);
Decision H8 of 17 December 2015 (updated with minor technical clarifications on
March 2016) concerning the methods of operation and the composition of the Technical Commission for data processing of the Administrative Commission for the coordination of social security systems (OJ C 263, 20.7.2016, p. 3);
Recommendation H1 of 19 June 2013 concerning the Gottardo judgment, according to which the advantages enjoyed by a State's own nationals under a bilateral convention on social security with a non-member country must also be granted to workers who are nationals of other Member States (OJ C 279, 27.9.2013, p. 13).
Pensions (P series):
Decision P1 of 12 June 2009 on the interpretation of Articles 50(4), 58 and 87(5) of Regulation (EC) No 883/2004 of the European Parliament and of the Council for the award of invalidity, old-age and survivors
benefits (OJ C 106, 24.4.2010, p. 21).
& /en 509 Recovery (R series):
Decision R1 of 20 June 2013 concerning the interpretation of Article 85 of Regulation (EC) No 987/2009 (OJ C 279, 27.9.2013, p. 11).
Sickness (S series):
Decision S1 of 12 June 2009 concerning the European Health Insurance Card (OJ C 106, 24.4.2010, p. 23);
Decision S2 of 12 June 2009 concerning the technical specifications of the European Health Insurance Card (OJ C 106, 24.4.2010, p. 26);
Decision S3 of 12 June 2009 defining the benefits covered by Articles 19(1) and 27(1) of Regulation (EC) No 883/2004 of the European Parliament and of the Council and Article 25(A)(3) of Regulation (EC) No 987/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council (OJ C 106, 24.4.2010, p. 40);
Decision S5 of 2 October 2009 on interpretation of the concept of "benefits in kind
as defined in Article 1(va) of Regulation (EC) No 883/2004 of the European Parliament and of the Council in the event of sickness or maternity pursuant to Articles 17, 19, 20, 22, 24(1), 25, 26, 27(1, 3, 4 and 5), 28, 34 and 36(1 and 2) of Regulation (EC) No 883/2004 and on calculation of the amounts to be refunded under Articles 62, 63 and 64 of Regulation (EC) No 987/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council (OJ C 106, 24.4.2010, p. 54);
& /en 510  Decision S6 of 22 December 2009 concerning the registration in the Member State of residence under Article 24 of Regulation (EC) No 987/2009 and the compilation of the inventories provided for in Article 64(4) of Regulation (EC) No 987/2009 (OJ C 107, 27.4.2010, p. 6);
Decision S8 of 15 June 2011 concerning the granting of prostheses, major appliances and other substantial benefits in kind provided for in Article 33 of Regulation (EC) No 883/2004 on the coordination of social security systems (OJ C 262, 06.9.2011, p. 6);
Decision S9 of 20 June 2013 concerning refund procedures for the implementation of Articles 35 and 41 of Regulation (EC) No 883/2004 (OJ C 279, 27.9.2013, p. 8);
Decision S10 of 19 December 2013 concerning the transition from Regulations (EEC) Nos 1408/71 and 574/72 to Regulations (EC) Nos 883/2004 and 987/2009 and the application of reimbursement procedures (OJ C 152, 20.5.2014, p. 16);
Recommendation S1 of 15 March 2012 concerning financial aspects of cross-border living organ donations (OJ C 240, 10.8.2012, p. 3);
Recommendation S2 of 22 October 2013 concerning the entitlement to benefits in kind for insured persons and members of their family during a stay in a third country under a bilateral convention between the competent Member State and the third country (OJ C 46, 18.2.2014, p. 8).
& /en 511 Unemployment (U series):
Decision U1 of 12 June 2009 concerning Article 54(3) of Regulation (EC) No 987/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council relating to increases in unemployment benefit for dependent members of the family (OJ C 106, 24.4.2010, p. 42);
Decision U2 of 12 June 2009 concerning the scope of Article 65(2) of Regulation (EC) No 883/2004 of the European Parliament and of the Council on the right to unemployment benefits of wholly unemployed persons other than frontier workers who were resident in the territory of a Member State other than the competent Member State during their last period of employment or self-employment (OJ C 106, 24.4.2010, p. 43);
Decision U3 of12 June 2009 concerning the scope of the concept of "partial unemployment
applicable to the unemployed persons referred to in Article 65(1) of Regulation (EC) No 883/2004 of the European Parliament and of the Council (OJ C 106, 24.4.2010, p. 45);
Decision U4 of 13 December 2011 concerning the reimbursement procedures under Article 65(6) and (7) of Regulation (EC) No 883/2004 and Article 70 of Regulation (EC) No 987/2009 (OJ C 57, 25.2.2012, p. 4);
Recommendation U1 of 12 June 2009 concerning the legislation applicable to unemployed persons engaging in part-time professional or trade activity in a Member State other than the State of residence (OJ C 106, 24.4.2010, p. 49);
& /en 512  Recommendation U2 of 12 June 2009 concerning the application of Article 64(1)(a) of Regulation (EC) No 883/2004 of the European Parliament and of the Council to unemployed persons accompanying their spouses or partners pursuing a professional or trade activity in a Member State other than the competent State (OJ C 106, 24.4.2010, p. 51).
PART II
ACTS REFERRED TO
Regulation (EC) No 883/2004 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 29 April 2004 on the coordination of social security systems,
as amended by:
Regulation (EC) No 988/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 September 2009;
Commission Regulation (EU) No 1244/2010 of 9 December 2010;
Regulation (EU) No 465/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 May 2012;

OJ L 166, 30.4.2004, p. 1.
OJ L 284, 30.10.2009, p. 43.
OJ L 338, 22.12.2010, p. 35.
OJ L 149, 8.6.2012, p. 4.
& /en 513  Commission Regulation (EU) No 1224/2012 of 18 December 2012;
Council Regulation (EU) No 517/2013 of 13 May 2013;
Commission Regulation (EU) No 1372/2013 of 19 December 2013,
as amended by Commission Regulation (EU) No 1368/2014 of 17 December 2014;
Commission Regulation (EU) 2017/492 of 21 March 2017.
Regulation (EC) No 987/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 September 2009 laying down the procedure for implementing Regulation (EC) No 883/2004 on the coordination of social security systems6, as amended by:
Commission Regulation (EU) No 1244/2010 of 9 December 2010;

OJ L 349, 19.12.2012, p. 45.
OJ L 158, 10.6.2013, p. 1.
OJ L 346, 20.12.2013, p. 27.
OJ L 366, 20.12.2014, p. 15.
OJ L 76, 22.3.2017, p. 13.
OJ L 284, 30.10.2009, p. 1.
OJ L 338, 22.12.2010, p. 35.
& /en 514  Regulation (EU) No 465/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 May 2012;
Commission Regulation (EU) No 1224/2012 of 18 December 2012;
Commission Regulation (EU) No 1372/2013 of 19 December 2013;
Commission Regulation (EU) No 1368/2014 of 17 December 2014;
Commission Regulation (EU) 2017/492 of 21 March 2017.

OJ L 149, 8.6.2012, p. 4.
OJ L 349, 19.12.2012, p. 45.
OJ L 346, 20.12.2013, p. 27.
OJ L 366, 20.12.2014, p. 15.
OJ L 76, 22.3.2017, p. 13.
& /en 515 PART III
ADAPTATIONS TO REGULATION (EC) NO 883/2004  AND REGULATION (EC) NO 987/2009
The provisions of Regulation (EC) No 883/2004 shall, for the purposes of this Agreement, be adapted as follows:
(a) the following shall be added to Annex II:
"UNITED KINGDOM-GERMANY
(a) Article 7(5) and (6) of the Convention on social security of 20 April 1960 (legislation applicable to civilians serving in the military forces);
(b) Article 5(5) and (6) of the Convention on unemployment insurance of 20 April 1960 (legislation applicable to civilians serving in the military forces).
UNITED KINGDOM-IRELAND
Article 19(2) of the Agreement of 14 December, 2004 on social security (concerning the transfer and reckoning of certain disability credits).";
& /en 516 (b) the following shall be added to Annex III:
"UNITED KINGDOM";
(c) the following shall be added to Annex VI:
"UNITED KINGDOM
Employment and Support Allowance (ESA)
(a) For awards granted before 1 April 2016 ESA is a cash sickness benefit for the initial 91 days (Assessment Phase). From the 92nd day ESA (Main Phase) becomes an invalidity benefit.
(b) For awards granted on or after 1 April 2016 ESA is a cash sickness benefit for the initial 365 days (Assessment Phase). From the 366th day ESA (Support Group) becomes an invalidity benefit.
Great Britain legislation: Part 1 of the Welfare Reform Act 2007.
Northern Ireland legislation: Part 1 of the Welfare Reform Act (Northern Ireland) 2007.";
& /en 517 (d) the following shall be added to Part 1 of Annex VIII:
"UNITED KINGDOM
All applications for retirement pension, state pension pursuant to Part 1 of the Pensions Act 2014, widows' and bereavement benefits, with the exception of those for which during a tax year beginning on or after 6 April 1975:
(i) the party concerned had completed periods of insurance, employment or residence under the legislation of the United Kingdom and another Member State; and one (or more) of the tax years was not considered a qualifying year within the meaning of the legislation of the United Kingdom;
(ii) the periods of insurance completed under the legislation in force in the United Kingdom for the periods prior to 5 July 1948 would be taken into account for the purposes of Article 52(1)(b) of the Regulation by application of the periods of insurance, employment or residence under the legislation of another Member State.
All applications for additional pension pursuant to the Social Security Contributions and Benefits Act 1992, section 44, and the Social Security Contributions and Benefits (Northern Ireland) Act 1992, section 44.";
& /en 518 (e) the following shall be added to Part 2 of Annex VIII:
"UNITED KINGDOM
Graduated retirement benefits paid pursuant to the National Insurance Act 1965, sections 36 and 37, and the National Insurance Act (Northern Ireland) 1966, sections 35 and 36.";
(f) the following shall be added to Annex X:
"UNITED KINGDOM
(a) State Pension Credit (State Pension Credit Act 2002 and State Pension Credit Act (Northern Ireland) 2002);
(b)
ncome-based allowances for jobseekers (Jobseekers Act 1995 and Jobseekers (Northern Ireland) Order 1995);
(d) Disability Living Allowance mobility component (Social Security Contributions and Benefits Act 1992 and Social Security Contributions and Benefits (Northern Ireland) Act 1992);
(e) Employment and Support Allowance Income-related (Welfare Reform Act 2007 and Welfare Reform Act (Northern Ireland) 2007).";
& /en 519 (g) the following shall be added to Annex XI:
"UNITED KINGDOM
1. Where, in accordance with United Kingdom legislation, a person may be entitled to a retirement pension if:
(a) the contributions of a former spouse are taken into account as if they were that person's own contributions; or
(b) the relevant contribution conditions are satisfied by that person's spouse or former spouse, then provided, in each case, that the spouse or former spouse is or had been exercising an activity as an employed or self-employed person, and had been subject to the legislation of two or more Member States, the provisions of Chapter 5 of Title III of this Regulation shall apply in order to determine entitlement under United Kingdom legislation. In this case, references in the said Chapter 5 to 'periods of insurance
shall be construed as references to periods of insurance completed by:
(i) a spouse or former spouse where a claim is made by:
a married woman, or
a person whose marriage has terminated otherwise than by the death of the spouse; or
& /en 520 (ii) a former spouse, where a claim is made by:
a widower who immediately before pensionable age is not entitled to widowed parent's allowance, or
a widow who immediately before pensionable age is not entitled to widowed mother's allowance, widowed parent's allowance or widow's pension, or who is only entitled to an age-related widow's pension calculated pursuant to Article 52(1)(b) of this Regulation, and for this purpose 'age-related widow's pension
means a widow's pension payable at a reduced rate in accordance with section 39(4) of the Social Security Contributions and Benefits Act 1992.
2. For the purposes of applying Article 6 of this Regulation to the provisions governing entitlement to attendance allowance, carer's allowance and disability living allowance, a period of employment, self-employment or residence completed in the territory of a Member State other than the United Kingdom shall be taken into account in so far as is necessary to satisfy conditions as to required periods of presence in the United Kingdom, prior to the day on which entitlement to the benefit in question first arises.
& /en 521 3. For the purposes of Article 7 of this Regulation, in the case of invalidity, old-age or survivors
cash benefits, pensions for accidents at work or occupational diseases and death grants, any beneficiary under United Kingdom legislation who is staying in the territory of another Member State shall, during that stay, be considered as if he resided in the territory of that other Member State.
4. Where Article 46 of this Regulation applies, if the person concerned suffers incapacity for work leading to invalidity while subject to the legislation of another Member State, the United Kingdom shall, for the purposes of Section 30A (5) of the Social Security Contributions and Benefits Act 1992, take account of any periods during which the person concerned has received, in respect of that incapacity for work:
(i) cash sickness benefits or wages or salary in lieu thereof; or
(ii) benefits within the meaning of Chapters 4 and 5 of Title III of this Regulation granted in respect of the invalidity which followed that incapacity for work, under the legislation of the other Member State, as though they were periods of short-term incapacity benefit paid in accordance with Sections 30A (1)-(4) of the Social Security Contributions and Benefits Act 1992.
In applying this provision, account shall only be taken of periods during which the person would have been incapable of work within the meaning of United Kingdom legislation.
& /en 522 5. (1) For the purpose of calculating an earnings factor in order to determine entitlement to benefits under United Kingdom legislation, for each week of activity as an employed person under the legislation of another Member State, and which commenced during the relevant income tax year within the meaning of United Kingdom legislation, the person concerned shall be deemed to have paid contributions as an employed earner, or have earnings on which contributions have been paid, on the basis of earnings equivalent to two-thirds of that year's upper earnings limit.
(2) For the purposes of Article 52(1)(b)(ii) of this Regulation, where:
(a) in any income tax year starting on or after 6 April 1975, a person carrying out activity as an employed person has completed periods of insurance, employment or residence exclusively in a Member State other than the United Kingdom, and the application of point 5(1) above results in that year being counted as a qualifying year within the meaning of United Kingdom legislation for the purposes of Article 52(1)(b)(i) of this Regulation, he shall be deemed to have been insured for 52 weeks in that year in that other Member State;
(b) any income tax year starting on or after 6 April 1975 does not count as a qualifying year within the meaning of United Kingdom legislation for the purposes of Article 52(1)(b)(i) of this Regulation, any periods of insurance, employment or residence completed in that year shall be disregarded
& /en 523 (3) For the purpose of converting an earnings factor into periods of insurance, the earnings factor achieved in the relevant income tax year within the meaning of United Kingdom legislation shall be divided by that year's lower earnings limit. The result shall be expressed as a whole number, any remaining fraction being ignored. The figure so calculated shall be treated as representing the number of weeks of insurance completed under United Kingdom legislation during that year, provided that such figure shall not exceed the number of weeks during which in that year the person was subject to that legislation.".
The provisions of Regulation (EC) No 987/2009 shall, for the purposes of this Agreement, be adapted as follows:
(a) the following shall be added to Annex 1:
"UNITED KINGDOM-BELGIUM
(a) The Exchange of Letters of 4 May and 14 June 1976 regarding Article 105(2) of Regulation (EEC) No 574/72 (waiving of reimbursement of the costs of administrative checks and medical examinations)
& /en 524 (b) The Exchange of Letters of 18 January and 14 March 1977 regarding Article 36(3) of Regulation (EEC) No 1408/71 (arrangement for reimbursement or waiving of reimbursement of the costs of benefits in kind provided under the terms of Chapter 1 of Title III of Regulation (EEC) No 1408/71) as amended by the Exchange of Letters of
May and 23 July 1982 (agreement for reimbursement of costs incurred under Article 22(1)(a) of Regulation (EEC) No 1408/71)
UNITED KINGDOM-DENMARK
The Exchange of Letters of 30 March and 19 April 1977 as modified by an Exchange of Letters of 8 November 1989 and of 10 January 1990 on agreement of waiving of reimbursement of the costs of benefits in kind and administrative checks and medical examinations
UNITED KINGDOM-ESTONIA
The Arrangement finalised on 29 March 2006 between the Competent Authorities of the Republic of Estonia and of the United Kingdom under Articles 36(3) and 63(3) of Regulation (EEC) No 1408/71 establishing other methods of reimbursement of the costs of benefits in kind provided under this Regulation by both countries with effect from 1 May 2004
& /en 525 UNITED KINGDOM-IRELAND
The Exchange of Letters of 9 July 1975 regarding Articles 36(3) and 63(3) of Regulation (EEC) No 1408/71 (arrangement for reimbursement or waiving of reimbursement of the costs of benefits in kind provided under the terms of Chapter 1 or 4 of Title III of Regulation (EEC) No 1408/71) and Article 105(2) of Regulation (EEC) No 574/72 (waiving of reimbursement of the costs of administrative checks and medical examinations)
UNITED KINGDOM-SPAIN
The Agreement of 18 June 1999 on the reimbursement of costs for benefits in kind granted pursuant to the provisions of Regulations (EEC) No 1408/71 and (EEC) No 574/72
UNITED KINGDOM-FRANCE
(a) The Exchange of Letters of 25 March and 28 April 1997 regarding Article 105(2) of Regulation (EEC) No 574/72 (waiving of reimbursement of the costs of administrative checks and medical examinations)
(b) The Agreement of 8 December 1998 on the specific methods of determining the amounts to be reimbursed for benefits in kind pursuant to Regulations (EEC) No 1408/71 and (EEC) No 574/72
& /en 526 UNITED KINGDOM-ITALY
The Arrangement signed on 15 December 2005 between the Competent Authorities of the Italian Republic and of the United Kingdom under Articles 36(3) and 63(3) of Regulation (EEC) No 1408/71 establishing other methods of reimbursement of the costs of benefits in kind provided under this Regulation by both countries with effect from 1 January 2005
UNITED KINGDOM-LUXEMBOURG
The Exchange of Letters of 18 December 1975 and 20 January 1976 regarding Article 105(2) of Regulation (EEC) No 574/72 (waiving of reimbursement of the costs entailed in administrative checks and medical examinations referred to in Article 105 of Regulation (EEC) No 574/72)
UNITED KINGDOM-HUNGARY
The Arrangement finalised on 1 November 2005 between the Competent Authorities of the Republic of Hungary and of the United Kingdom under Articles 35(3) and 41(2) of Regulation (EEC) No 883/2004 establishing other methods of reimbursement of the costs of benefits in kind provided under that Regulation by both countries with effect from
May 2004
& /en 527 UNITED KINGDOM-MALTA
The Arrangement finalised on 17 January 2007 between the Competent Authorities of Malta and of the United Kingdom under Articles 35(3) and 41(2) of Regulation (EEC) No 883/2004 establishing other methods of reimbursement of the costs of benefits in kind provided under that Regulation by both countries with effect from 1 May 2004
UNITED KINGDOM-NETHERLANDS
The second sentence of Article 3 of the Administrative Arrangement of 12 June 1956 on the implementation of the Convention of 11 August 1954
UNITED KINGDOM-PORTUGAL
The Arrangement of 8 June 2004 establishing other methods of reimbursement of the costs of benefits in kind provided by both countries with effect from 1 January 2003
UNITED KINGDOM-FINLAND
The Exchange of Letters 1 and 20 June 1995 concerning Articles 36(3) and 63(3) of Regulation (EEC) No 1408/71 (reimbursement or waiving of reimbursement of the cost of benefits in kind) and Article 105(2) of Regulation (EEC) 574/72 (waiving of reimbursement of the cost of administrative checks and medical examinations)
& /en 528 UNITED KINGDOM-SWEDEN
The Arrangement of 15 April 1997 concerning Article 36(3) and Article 63(3) of Regulation (EEC) No 1408/71 (reimbursement or waiving of reimbursement of the cost of benefits in kind) and Article 105(2) of Regulation (EEC) No 574/72 (waiving of refunds of the costs of administrative checks and medical examinations)".
(b) the following shall be added to Annex 3:
"UNITED KINGDOM".
________________
& /en 529 ANNEX II
PROVISIONS OF UNION LAW REFERRED TO IN ARTICLE 41(4)
1. Council Directive 64/432/EEC of 26 June 1964 on animal health problems affecting intra-Community trade in bovine animals and swine
2. Council Directive 91/68/EEC of 28 January 1991 on animal health conditions governing intra-Community trade in ovine and caprine animals
3. Chapter II of Council Directive 2009/156/EC of 30 November 2009 on animal health conditions governing the movement and importation from third countries of equidae
4. Chapter II of Council Directive 2009/158/EC of 30 November 2009 on animal health conditions governing intra-Community trade in, and imports from third countries of, poultry and hatching eggs
5. Chapter II of Council Directive 92/65/EEC of 13 July 1992 laying down animal health requirements governing trade in and imports into the Community of animals, semen, ova and embryos not subject to animal health requirements laid down in specific Community rules referred to in Annex A (I) to Directive 90/425/EEC

OJ 121, 29.7.1964, p. 1977.
OJ L 46, 19.2.1991, p. 19.
OJ L 192, 23.7.2010, p. 1.
OJ L 343, 22.12.2009, p. 74.
OJ L 268, 14.9.1992, p. 54.
& /en 530 6. Chapter II of Council Directive 89/556/EEC of 25 September 1989 on animal health conditions governing intra-Community trade in and importation from third countries of embryos of domestic animals of the bovine species
7. Chapter II of Council Directive 88/407/EEC of 14 June 1988 laying down the animal health requirements applicable to intra
Community trade in and imports of deep-frozen semen of domestic animals of the bovine species
8. Chapter II of Council Directive 90/429/EEC of 26 June 1990 laying down the animal health requirements applicable to intra
Community trade in and imports of semen of domestic animals of the porcine species
9. Chapter III of Council Directive 2006/88/EC of 24 October 2006 on animal health requirements for aquaculture animals and products thereof, and on the prevention and control of certain diseases in aquatic animals
10. Chapter II of Regulation (EU) No 576/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 June 2013 on the non-commercial movement of pet animals and repealing Regulation (EC) No 998/2003

________________
OJ L 302, 19.10.1989, p. 1.
OJ L 194, 22.7.1988, p. 10.
OJ L 224, 18.8.1990, p. 62.
OJ L 328, 24.11.2006, p. 14.
OJ L 178, 28.6.2013, p. 1.
& /en 531 ANNEX III
TIME LIMITS FOR THE SITUATIONS  OR CUSTOMS PROCEDURES REFERRED TO IN ARTICLE 49(1)
The time limits set out in this Annex are the relevant end dates for the application of Regulation (EU) No 952/2013.
Situation / procedure Time limit 1. Temporary storage 90 days, Article 149 of Regulation (EU) No 952/2013 2. Release for free circulation 1 month + 10 days after acceptance of the declaration, Article 146(3) of Delegated Regulation (EU) 2015/2446
concerning the supplementary declaration; "reasonable period of time" as regards verification, Article 194 of Regulation (EU) No 952/2013 Maximum: 60 days
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2015/2446 of 28 July 2015 supplementing Regulation (EU) No 952/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council as regards detailed rules concerning certain provisions of the Union Customs Code (OJ L 343, 29.12.2015, p. 1).
& /en 532 Situation / procedure Time limit 3. Special procedures Period for discharge is obligatory for inward processing, outward processing, end-use and temporary admission (D.E. 4/17 in Annex A to Delegated Regulation (EU) 2015/2446). Discharge by placing under a subsequent customs procedure, taking out of the customs territory or being destroyed, Article 215(1) of Regulation (EU) No 952/2013. (a) Union transit Maximum: 12 months after release (b) Customs warehousing Maximum: 12 months after the end of the transition period (c) Free zones At the end of the transition period (d) Temporary admission Maximum: 12 months after release  (e) End-use Maximum: 12 months after release  (f) Inward processing Maximum: 12 months after release (g) Outward processing Maximum: 12 months after release 4. Export 150 days after release 5. Re-export 150 days after release
________________
& /en 533 ANNEX IV
LIST OF NETWORKS, INFORMATION SYSTEMS  AND DATABASES REFERRED IN ARTICLES 50, 53, 99 AND 100
1. Backwards compatibility for the United Kingdom and the Union shall be established to ensure that, for any changes that are made to the networks, information systems and databases, as well as for any changes to formats for exchanging information, the Member States and the United Kingdom can continue to accept each other's information in the current format, unless the Union and the United Kingdom agree otherwise.
2. The United Kingdom's access to any given network, information system or database shall be limited in time. The respective time period is indicated for each network, information system or database. Where exchanges of information between customs authorities would be required for the implementation of procedures in accordance with Article 49 once electronic data-processing is no longer possible in accordance with this Annex, alternative means for the exchange and storage of information shall be used.
& /en 534 Part I: Customs
Customs IT system Type of access Time limit ICS (Import Control System) Lodgement of the pre-arrival declaration limited to:  Receiving and sending entry summary declaration (ENS) data on declarations lodged before the end of the transition period (in the case of subsequent ports or diversion);  Receiving and sending risk data on those declarations lodged before the end of the transition period. 31 July 2021 NCTS (New Computerised Transit System) All functionalities applied to ongoing transit operations, i.e. movements released for transit before the end of the transition period. [No release of new transit operations after the end of the transition period.] 31 January 2021
& /en 535 Customs IT system Type of access Time limit ECS (Export Control System) Confirmation of exit for ongoing export operations, i.e. goods released for export before the end of the transition period:  For operations with the customs offices of exit in the United Kingdom to confirm in ECS the exit of the goods;  For operations with the customs offices of exit in Member States, i.e. the customs offices of export in the United Kingdom to receive the confirmations of exit from the Member States' customs offices of exit. 31 January 2021 INF (Information Sheet)  Read only access to INF Specific Trader Portal for United Kingdom traders;  Read/write access to active INFs in INF system for customs offices. 31 December 2021
& /en 536 Customs IT system Type of access Time limit SURV-RECAPP (Tariff Surveillance System  Receiving Application) Transmission by the United Kingdom's customs authorities of data elements for release for free circulation (RFC) or export procedures:  Surveillance Declaration Records (SDRs) not yet transmitted for RFC or export procedures under which the goods were placed before the end of the transition period;  SDRs elements for RFC ending or discharging an ongoing procedure or situation. 28 February 2021 EBTI3 (European Binding Tariff Information) Input for the calculation of customs debt: Access to information pertaining to decisions related to BTI or any subsequent event which may affect the original application or decision [full access for consultation].
January 2021 TARIC3 (Integrated Customs Tariff of the Community) Input for the calculation of customs debt: Transmissions of daily updates to the United Kingdom after the end of the transition period, with the exception of confidential data (statistical surveillance data). 31 December 2021
& /en 537 Customs IT system Type of access Time limit QUOTA2 (System for Managing Tariff Quotas, Ceilings and other Surveillances) Input for the calculation of customs debt: Management of quotas, cancellation of requests for quotas and returns of unused allocated quantities.
January 2021 SMS TRA, EXP (Specimen Management System) Read-only access to the database with specimens of stamps, seals and certificates. 31 January 2021 SMS QUOTA (Specimen Management System) Read-only access to the database with certificates of authenticity necessary in order to benefit from the quotas.
January 2021 OWNRES (Own Resources reporting of cases of fraud and irregularities involving traditional own resources (TOR) in excess of EUR 10 000, Article 5(1) of Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 608/2014) Limited access restricted to cases involving the United Kingdom (no access to global analyses). 20 February 2026
& /en 538 Customs IT system Type of access Time limit WOMIS (Write-off management information system for TOR case-reports under Article 13(3) of Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 609/2014) Full access, as by default already limited to national write-off reports (read-only access as from 1 July 2025 in the framework of the liquidation of the separate account by 31 December 2025). 30 June 2025
Supporting system Type of access Time limit EOS/EORI (Economic Operators System  Economic Operators Registration and Identification) Read-only access for the related systems. 31 December 2021 CDS (Customs Decisions System) Read-only access for traders in the United Kingdom and for customs offices in the United Kingdom. 31 January 2021 CS/RD2 (Central Services/Reference Data) Read-only access for Reference Data; Write access for customs offices of NA-UK only. 31 December 2021
& /en 539 Supporting system Type of access Time limit CS/MIS (Central Services/Management Information System) Write-only access for uploading unavailabilities and business statistics. 31 July 2021 GTP (Generic Trader Portal) Access to the generic functions of the portal for traders in the United Kingdom until the last Specific Trader Portal is switched off for traders in the United Kingdom. 31 December 2021
Network and infrastructure Type of access Time limit CCN (Common Communication Network) Linked to the access for the related systems. 31 December 2021 (or longer if required for excise or taxation) UUM&DS (Uniform User Management and Digital Signatures) Linked to the access for the related systems. 31 December 2021 (or longer if required for excise or taxation) CCN2 (Common Communication Network 2) Linked to the access for the related systems. 31 December 2021 (or longer if required for excise or taxation)
& /en 540 Part II: Excise
Excise IT system Type of access Time limit EMCS Core (Excise Movement Control System) Duty suspension: Transmissions to and from the United Kingdom of reports of receipt / reports of export (IE818). 31 May 2021 EMCS Admin Coop (Excise Movement Control System Administrative Cooperation)  Transmissions to and from the United Kingdom of messages relating to open movements (event reports, control reports, administrative cooperation (enquiries on open EMCS movements);  Member States and the United Kingdom shall keep EMCS Administrative Cooperation online to allow queries and audits on movements up to the end of the transition period. 31 May 2021
31 December 2024
Supporting system Type of access Time limit SEED (System for the Exchange of Excise Data) Read only, with United Kingdom's economic operators invalidated. 31 May 2021 CS/MISE (Central Services/Management Information System for EMCS) Filtered to restrict to movements involving the United Kingdom. 31 May 2021
& /en 541
Network and infrastructure Type of access Time limit CCN (Common Communication Network) Linked to the access for the related systems. 31 May 2021 (or longer if required for excise or taxation)
Part III: VAT
VAT IT system Type of access Time limit VAT-VIES (VAT Information Exchange System) Taxable persons registration information: Reciprocal access to the IT systems, by the United Kingdom and the Member States1, to exchange, until 31 December 2024, historical registration information of the other party
(registration data entered in the system before the end of the transition period) as well as registration information of the other party updated after the transition period (e.g. ending of registration of a taxable person).
31 December 2024

For the purposes of this Annex, "reciprocal access" means that the United Kingdom must ensure that Member States have the same access to such data in the United Kingdom as the United Kingdom and the Member States have to such data in the Member States.
For the purposes of this Annex, "other party" means, with respect to the United Kingdom, a Member State and, with respect to a Member State, the United Kingdom.
The United Kingdom's data concerning the VAT identification numbers of its taxable persons must be updated until 31 December 2024.
& /en 542 VAT IT system Type of access Time limit
Transactions
turnover information: Access to the IT systems, by the United Kingdom and the Member States with reciprocal access, to exchange information contained in recapitulative statements submitted to the other party for transactions that took place
before the end of the transition period and where taxable persons of the receiving party are involved; The United Kingdom and the Member States shall have no access to each other's turnover information related to transactions that take place after 31 December 2020.
31 December 2024 VAT Refund Access to the IT system to:  Forward to the Member States the VAT refund applications submitted by taxable persons established in the United Kingdom in accordance with Directive 2008/9/EC and to receive from the Member States the VAT refund applications submitted by taxable persons established in a Member State;
30 April 2021
Including transactions covered by Article 47(1).
& /en 543 VAT IT system Type of access Time limit
Handle
VAT refund applications received by the United Kingdom and submitted by taxable persons established in a Member State and VAT refund applications received by the Member States and submitted by taxable persons established in the United Kingdom. 31 January 2022 MOSS (Mini-One-Stop-Shop) Registration Information: Access to the IT systems, by the United Kingdom and the Member States with reciprocal access, to:
Exchange the registration and historical registration information; 31 December 2024  Disseminate information relating to new MOSS registrations, for registrations, the effective date of registration of which is before or on 31 December 2020. 20 February 2021
For the purposes of this indent, "handle" means completing all actions in respect of a claim to allow it to be finalised, including notification of any disallowed amounts, along with details of how to appeal, and repayment of any allowable amounts, along with the exchange of any relevant messages with the VAT Refund system.
& /en 544 VAT IT system Type of access Time limit
VAT Return: Access to the IT systems, by the United Kingdom and the Member States with reciprocal access, to:
Exchange MOSS return information, for returns submitted before or on 31 January 2021; 20 February 2021  Exchange amendments relating to MOSS VAT returns submitted before or on 20 January 2021; 20 January 2022  Exchange VAT return information for transactions where the other party is involved; 31 December 2024  The United Kingdom and the Member States shall have no access to each other's VAT return information of transactions that take place after 31 December 2020.
& /en 545 VAT IT system Type of access Time limit
Payment information: Access to the IT systems, by the United Kingdom and the Member States with reciprocal access, to:
Exchange payment information relating to payments received from MOSS registered businesses before or on 31 January 2021; 20 February 2021  In respect of taxable transactions in the other party, exchange information relating to reimbursements or payments for amendments relating to MOSS VAT returns submitted before or on 31 December 2021. 20 January 2022
Supporting system Type of access Time limit CCN/eFCA Administrative cooperation VAT (Common Communications Network/eForm Central Application) Transmissions between the United Kingdom and the Member States of requests  and follow-up to these requests  with regard to administrative cooperation for VAT purposes. 31 December 2024 TIC VAT Refund preferences Access by the United Kingdom in order to update the United Kingdom's VAT refund preferences  31 March 2021
& /en 546 Part IV: Tax and duty recovery assistance
Supporting system Type of access Time limit CCN/eFCA Recovery assistance Transmissions between the United Kingdom and the Member States of requests  and follow-up of these requests  with regard to recovery assistance. 31 December 2025
________________
& /en 547 ANNEX V
EURATOM
This annex sets out the categories of community equipment and other property related to the provision of safeguards located in the United Kingdom under the Euratom Treaty which shall become property of the United Kingdom at the end of the transition period.
At the end of the transition period, the European Commission shall transmit to the United Kingdom the final inventory of Euratom equipment and other property transferred.
In accordance with Article 84(1) and Article 148, the United Kingdom shall reimburse to the Union the value of that equipment and other property, calculated based on the value assigned to that equipment and other property in the consolidated accounts for the year 2020. The said value shall be communicated by European Commission to the United Kingdom upon its final regulatory approval.
The Euratom equipment is located at:
Sellafield1, the UK nuclear fuel reprocessing site;

Sellafield Ltd, SELLAFIELD CA20 1PG, UNITED KINGDOM
& /en 548  Dounreay1, the UK's former centre of fast reactor research and development;
Sizewell2, a site with two nuclear power stations, Sizewell A (not in operation) and Sizewell B, a pressurised water reactor still in operation;
Capenhurst3, a uranium enrichment plant;
Springfields
a fuel fabrication plant;
Other reactors, research, medical and other facilities, where safeguards equipment is being used.

Dounreay Site Restoration Ltd, KW14 7TZ THURSO CAITHNESS, UNITED KINGDOM
EDF Energy Nuclear Generation Limited
Sizewell B Power Station, SUFFOLK, IP16 4UR LEISTON
Urenco UK Limited, Capenhurst Works, CHESTER CH1 6ER, UNITED KINGDOM
Westinghouse Springfields Fuels Ltd, SALWICK PRESTON PR4 OXJ, UNITED KINGDOM
& /en 549 The Euratom equipment comprises various elements consisting of fixed installations and related devices necessary for the use of these fixed installations and forming an inherent part of the whole system installed:
1. Seals:
Metal seals for single use;
Fibre optic seals for single and multiple use; and
Seal readers.
2. Surveillance equipment:
Digital and analogue single and multiple component safeguards surveillance systems.
3. Measurement equipment (non-destructive assay):
Various types of gamma detectors with pre-amplifiers and counting electronics for gamma measurements;
Various types of neutron detectors with pre-amplifiers and counting electronics for neutron measurements; as well as
& /en 550  Equipment for fresh and spent fuel assembly, Uranium drum and Plutonium can content measurements including rod and fuel assembly scanners, balances and load cells.
4. Laboratory equipment (forming part of the on-site laboratory at Sellafield):
Mass spectrometer (TIMS);
gamma and X-ray based measurement instruments (e.g. K-edge densitometry and XRF); and
Gloveboxes with analytical equipment including densitometer and analytical balances.
To facilitate the most effective handover of this equipment, the United Kingdom and the Community shall make the necessary legal arrangements to release the Community from its obligations and liabilities under its agreement dated 25 March 1994 with British Nuclear Fuels PLC (now Sellafield Ltd).
& /en 551 5. Computer and related equipment (in offices and measurements systems):
Personal computers as well as related equipment including remote data transmission infrastructure (battery packs and power supplies, hardware devices to allow to control multiple computers, network equipment including fibre optics, Ethernet cables and converters, switches, serial servers, virtual private network router, time and domain controller, cabinets); as well as
Related servers, screens and printers.
________________
& /en 552 ANNEX VI
LIST OF ADMINISTRATIVE COOPERATION PROCEDURES  REFERRED TO IN ARTICLE 98
1. Administrative cooperation between the Member States related to supplier's declarations on the origin of goods, established for the purpose of preferential trade between the Union and certain countries (Articles 61 to 66 of Implementing Regulation (EU) 2015/2447).
2. For the verification of proofs of origin issued by third country authorities or agencies authorised by them (special non-preferential import arrangements) (Article 59 of Implementing Regulation (EU) 2015/2447) and for the verification of proofs of origin issued or made out by third country authorities or exporters (preferential arrangements) (Articles 108 to 111 and 125 of Implementing Regulation (EU) 2015/2447, Article 32 of Annex II to Regulation 2016/1076 of the European Parliament and of the Council, Article 55 of Annex VI to Council Decision 2013/755/EU and the equivalent provisions in preferential agreements
3. Mutual assistance in the framework of the recovery of a customs debt (Articles 101(1) and Articles 102(1) of the Regulation (EU) No 952/2013, Article 165 of Implementing Regulation (EU) 2015/2447).
& /en 553 4. Mutual assistance in the framework of transfer of the amount of customs debt by the Member State which has accepted a guarantee to the Member State where the customs debt is incurred (point (c) of Article 92(1) of Regulation (EU) No 952/2013, Article 153 of Implementing Regulation (EU) 2015/2447).
5. Verification of proofs of Union status (and administrative assistance) (Article 153 of Regulation (EU) No 952/2013, Article 212 of Implementing Regulation (EU) 2015/2447).
6. Communication between authorities relating to returned goods (Article 203 of Regulation (EU) No 952/2013, Article 256 of Implementing Regulation (EU) 2015/2447).
7. Administrative cooperation in the framework of the recovery of other charges for goods placed under temporary admission according to the ATA Convention or the Istanbul Convention (point (c) of Article 226(3) of Regulation (EU) No 952/2013, Article 170 of Implementing Regulation (EU) 2015/2447).
8. Mutual assistance for obtaining supplementary information in order to decide on an application for remission or repayment (Articles 22 and 116(1) of Regulation (EU) No 952/2013, Article 175 of Implementing Regulation (EU) 2015/2447).
9. Verification and administrative assistance for post-release controls of the information related to the Union transit operation (Article 48 of Regulation (EU) No 952/2013, Articl
292 of Implementing Regulation (EU) 2015/2447).
& /en 554 10. Administrative cooperation in the framework of the recovery of other charges under transit procedures (points (a), (b) and (c) of Article 226(3) of Regulation (EU) No 952/2013, Articles 167 and 169 of Implementing Regulation (EU) 2015/2447).
11. Notification of recovery of duties and other charges under the Union transit procedure or under transit according to the TIR Convention (points (a) and (b) of Article 226(3) of Regulation (EU) No 952/2013, Article 168 of Implementing Regulation (EU) 2015/2447).
12. Direct cooperation and exchange of information between Member States concerning export controls on dual-use items (Article 19(2) of Council Regulation (EC) 428/2009).
________________
& /en 555 ANNEX VII
LIST OF ACTS/PROVISIONS REFERRED TO IN ARTICLE 128(6)
1. Council Regulation (EC) No 2100/94 of 27 July 1994 on Community plant variety rights (without prejudice to Article 96(1) of this Agreement).

OJ L 227, 1.9.1994, p. 1.
& /en 556 2. Titles III and IX of Directive 2001/83/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of
November 2001 on the Community code relating to medicinal products for human use,
Regulation (EC) No 1901/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 December 2006 on medicinal products for paediatric use,
Regulation (EC) No 1394/2007 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 November 2007 on advanced therapy medicinal products,
Regulation (EC) No 141/2000 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 December 1999 on orphan medicinal products4, Titles III and VII of Directive 2001/82/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 6 November 2001 on the Community code relating to veterinary medicinal products,
Regulation (EC) No 470/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 6 May 2009 laying down Community procedures for the establishment of residue limits of pharmacologically active substances in foodstuffs of animal origin,
Regulation (EC) No 726/2004 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 31 March 2004 laying down Community procedures for the authorisation and supervision of medicinal products for human and veterinary use and establishing a European Medicines Agency,
Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) No 520/2012 of 19 June 2012 on the performance of pharmacovigilance activities provided for in Regulation (EC) No 726/2004 of the European Parliament and of the Council and Directive 2001/83/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council,
and Commission Regulation (EC) No 1234/2008 of 24 November 2008 concerning the examination of variations to the terms of marketing authorisations for medicinal products for human use and veterinary medicinal products.

OJ L 311, 28.11.2001, p. 67.
OJ L 378, 27.12.2006, p. 1.
OJ L 324, 10.12.2007, p. 121.
OJ L 18, 22.1.2000, p. 1.
OJ L 311, 28.11.2001, p. 1.
OJ L 152, 16.6.2009, p. 11.
OJ L 136, 30.4.2004, p. 1.
OJ L 159, 20.6.2012, p. 5.
OJ L 334, 12.12.2008, p. 7.
& /en 557 3. Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 December 2006 concerning the Registration, Evaluation, Authorisation and Restriction of Chemicals (REACH), establishing a European Chemicals Agency.
4. Regulation (EC) No 1272/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 December 2008 on classification, labelling and packaging of substances and mixtures.
5. Regulation (EC) No 1107/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 21 October 2009 concerning the placing of plant protection products on the market,
and Regulation (EC) No 396/2005 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 February 2005 on maximum residue levels of pesticides in or on food and feed of plant and animal origin.
6. Regulation (EU) No 528/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 May 2012 concerning the making available on the market and use of biocidal products.
7. Regulation (EU) No 536/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 April 2014 on clinical trials on medicinal products for human use.

OJ L 396, 30.12.2006, p.1.
OJ L 353, 31.12.2008, p. 1.
OJ L 309, 24.11.2009, p. 1.
OJ L 70, 16.3.2005, p. 1.
OJ L 167, 27.6.2012, p. 1.
OJ L 158, 27.5.2014, p. 1.
& /en 558 8. Article 16 of Commission Regulation (EC) No 1235/2008 of 8 December 2008 laying down detailed rules for implementation of Council Regulation (EC) No 834/2007 as regards the arrangements for imports of organic products from third countries.
9. Regulation (EC) No 391/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 April 2009 on common rules and standards for ship inspection and survey organisations.
10. Directive 2001/18/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 March 2001 on the deliberate release into the environment of genetically modified organisms,
point (c) of Article 6(3) of Regulation (EC) No 1829/2003 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 September 2003 on genetically modified food and feed.
11. Regulation (EC) No 1924/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 20 December 2006 on nutrition and health claims made on foods.

OJ L 334, 12.12.2008, p. 25.
OJ L 131, 28.5.2009, p. 11.
OJ L 106, 17.4.2001, p. 1.
OJ L 268, 18.10.2003, p. 1.
OJ L 404, 30.12.2006, p. 9.
& /en 559 12. Regulation (EU) No 1143/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 October 2014 on the prevention and management of the introduction and spread of invasive alien species.
13. Regulation (EC) No 767/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 July 2009 on the placing on the market and use of feed.
________________
OJ L 317, 4.11.2014, p. 35.
OJ L 229, 1.9.2009, p. 1.
& /en 560 ANNEX VIII
RULES OF PROCEDURE OF THE JOINT COMMITTEE  AND SPECIALISED COMMITTEES
Rule 1
Chair
1. The Joint Committee shall be co-chaired by a Member of the European Commission and a representative of the Government of the United Kingdom at ministerial level, or by high-level officials designated to act as their alternates. The European Union and the United Kingdom shall notify each other in writing of the designated co-chairs and their alternates.
2. The decisions of the co-chairs provided for by these Rules of Procedure shall be taken by mutual consent.
3. A co-chair who is unable to attend a meeting may be replaced for that meeting by a designee. The co-chair, or his or her designee, shall inform in writing the other co-chair and the Secretariat of the Joint Committee of the designation as early as possible.
4. The designee of the co-chair shall exercise the rights of that co-chair to the extent of the designation. Any reference in these Rules of Procedure to the co-chairs shall be understood to include a designee.
& /en 561 Rule 2
Secretariat
The Secretariat of the Joint Committee (the "Secretariat") shall be composed of an official of the European Commission and an official of the Government of United Kingdom. The Secretariat shall, under the authority of the co-chairs, perform the tasks conferred on it by these Rules of Procedure.
Rule 3
Participation in meetings
1. Before each meeting, the Union and the United Kingdom shall inform each other through the Secretariat of the intended composition of the delegations.
2. Where appropriate and by decision of the co-chairs, experts or other persons who are not members of delegations may be invited to attend meetings of the Joint Committee in order to provide information on a particular subject.
Rule 4
Meetings
1. The Joint Committee shall hold its meetings alternately in Brussels and London, unless the co-chairs decide otherwise.
& /en 562 2. By way of derogation from paragraph 1, the co-chairs may decide that a meeting of the Joint Committee be held by videoconference or teleconference.
3. Each meeting of the Joint Committee shall be convened by the Secretariat at a date and place decided by the co-chairs. Where either the Union or the United Kingdom has made a request for a meeting, the Joint Committee shall endeavour to meet within 30 days of such request. In cases of urgency it shall endeavour to meet sooner.
Rule 5
Documents
Written documents on which the deliberations of the Joint Committee are based shall be numbered and circulated to the Union and the United Kingdom by the Secretariat as documents of the Joint Committee.
Rule 6
Correspondence
1. The Union and the United Kingdom shall send their correspondence addressed to the Joint Committee to the Secretariat. Such correspondence may be sent in any form of written communication, including by electronic mail.
& /en 563 2. The Secretariat shall ensure that correspondence addressed to the Joint Committee is forwarded to the co-chairs and is circulated, where appropriate, in accordance with Rule 5.
3. All correspondence from or addressed directly to the co-chairs shall be forwarded to the Secretariat and shall be circulated, where appropriate, in accordance with Rule 5.
Rule 7
Agenda for the meetings
1. For each meeting a draft provisional agenda shall be drawn up by the Secretariat. It shall be transmitted, together with the relevant documents, to the co-chairs no later than 15 days before the date of the meeting.
2. The provisional agenda shall include those items, the inclusion of which in the agenda has been requested by the Union or the United Kingdom. Any such request, together with any relevant document, shall be submitted to the Secretariat no later than 21 days before the beginning of the meeting.
3. No later than 10 days before the date of the meeting, the co-chairs shall decide on the provisional agenda for a meeting. They may decide to make that provisional agenda, or any part thereof, public before the beginning of the meeting.
& /en 564 4. The agenda shall be adopted by the Joint Committee at the beginning of each meeting. On request by the Union or the United Kingdom an item other than those included in the provisional agenda may be included in the agenda by decision of the Joint Committee.
5. In exceptional cases, the co-chairs may decide to derogate from the time limits specified in paragraphs 1 and 2
Rule 8
Minutes
1. Draft minutes of each meeting shall be drawn up by the Secretariat, within 21 days from the end of the meeting, unless the co-chairs decide otherwise.
2. The minutes shall, as a rule, summarise each item on the agenda, specifying where applicable:
(a) the documents submitted to the Joint Committee;
(b) any statement that one of the co-chairs requested to be entered in the minutes; and
(c) the decisions adopted, recommendations made, joint statements decided upon and operational conclusions adopted on specific items.
3. The minutes shall include a list of the names, titles and capacity of all individuals who attended the meeting.
& /en 565 4. The minutes shall be approved in writing by the co-chairs within 28 days of the date of the meeting or by any other date decided by the co-chairs. Once approved, two authentic versions of the minutes shall be signed by the members of the Secretariat. The Union and the United Kingdom shall each receive one of these authentic versions. The co-chairs may decide that signing and exchanging electronic copies satisfies this requirement.
5. The Secretariat shall also prepare a summary of the minutes. After having approved the summary, the co-chairs may decide to make it public.
Rule 9
Decisions and Recommendations
1. In the period between meetings, the Joint Committee may adopt decisions or recommendations by written procedure, if the co-chairs decide to use this procedure. The written procedure shall consist of an exchange of notes between the co-chairs.
2. Where the Joint Committee adopts decisions or recommendations, the words "Decision
or "Recommendation", respectively, shall be inserted in the title of such acts. The Secretariat shall record any decision or recommendation under a serial number and with a reference to the date of its adoption.
3. Decisions adopted by the Joint Committee shall specify the date at which they take effect.
& /en 566 4. Decisions and recommendations adopted by the Joint Committee shall be signed by the co-chairs and shall be sent by the Secretariat to the parties immediately after the signature.
Rule 10
Publicity and Confidentiality
1. Unless otherwise decided by the co-chairs, the meetings of the Joint Committee shall be confidential.
2. Where the Union or the United Kingdom submits information considered as confidential or protected from disclosure under its laws and regulations to the Joint Committee or any specialised committee, the other party shall treat that information received as confidential.
3. Without prejudice to paragraph 2, the Union and the United Kingdom may each decide individually on whether to publish, the decisions and recommendations adopted by the Joint Committee in their respective official publication journals.
Rule 11
Languages
1. The official languages of the Joint Committee shall be the official languages of the Union and the United Kingdom.
& /en 567 2. The working language of the Joint Committee shall be English. Unless otherwise decided by the co-chairs, the Joint Committee shall base its deliberations on documents prepared in English.
Rule 12
Expenses
1. The Union and the United Kingdom shall each meet any expenses they incur as a result of participating in the meetings of the Joint Committee.
2. Expenditure in connection with the organisation of meetings and reproduction of documents shall be borne by the Union for meetings held in Brussels, and by the United Kingdom for meetings held in London.
3. Expenditure in connection with interpretation to and from the working language of the Joint Committee at meetings shall be borne by the party requesting such interpretation.
Rule 13
Specialised committees
1. Without prejudice to paragraphs 2 to 3 of this Rule, Rules 1 to 12 shall apply mutatis mutandis to the specialised committees unless decided otherwise by the Joint Committee.
& /en 568 2. The specialised committees shall be co-chaired by representatives designated by the European Commission and the Government of the United Kingdom. The European Union and the United Kingdom shall notify each other of the designated representatives.
3. All information and reports to be provided by a specialised committee pursuant to Article 165(4) of the Agreement shall be submitted to the Joint Committee without undue delay.
Rule 14
Annual report
For each calendar year, the annual report on the functioning of the Agreement provided for in Article 164(6) of the Agreement shall be drawn up by the Secretariat by 1 May of the following year. It shall be adopted and signed by the co-chairs.
________________
& /en 569 ANNEX IX
RULES OF PROCEDURE
PART
RULES OF PROCEDURE FOR DISPUTE SETTLEMENT
I. Definitions
1. For the purposes of these Rules of Procedure, the following definitions shall apply:
(a) "Party" means the Union or the United Kingdom;
(b)
complainant
means any Party that requests the establishment of an arbitration panel under Article 170 of the Agreement;
(c)
respondent
means the Party that is alleged to be in violation of a provision of this Agreement;
& /en 570 (d)
representative of a Party
means a servant of, or any person appointed by a Party who represents that Party for the purposes of a dispute under this Agreement;
(e
"adviser
means a person designated by a Party to advise or assist that Party in connection with proceedings before an arbitration panel;
(f)
assistant
means a person who, under the terms of his or her appointment, conducts research for or provides assistance to a member of an arbitration panel under the direction and control of that member.
II. Notifications
2. The following rules shall apply to notifications between the Parties and the arbitration panel:
(a) the arbitration panel shall send all requests, notices, written submissions and other documents to both Parties at the same time;
(b) where a Party addresses a request, notice, written submission or other document to the arbitration panel, it shall send a copy thereof to the other Party at the same time; and
(c) where a Party addresses a request, notice, written submission or other document in relation to the dispute to the other Party, it shall send a copy thereof to the arbitration panel at the same time.
& /en 571 3. Any notification referred to in point 2 shall be made by e-mail or, where appropriate, any other means of telecommunication that provides a record of the sending thereof. Unless proven otherwise, such notification shall be deemed to have been delivered on the date of its sending. All notifications shall be addressed to the Legal Service of the European Commission and to the Legal Adviser of the Foreign and Commonwealth Office of the United Kingdom, respectively.
4. The International Bureau of the Permanent Court of Arbitration shall, upon the written request of the Parties or the arbitration panel, act as a channel of communications between the Parties and the arbitration panel.
5. Minor errors of a clerical nature in any request, notice, written submission or other document related to the proceedings before the arbitration panel may be corrected by delivery of a new document clearly indicating the changes.
6. If the last day for delivery of a document falls on a weekend or legal holiday applicable to the European Commission or to the Foreign and Commonwealth Office of the United Kingdom, as the case may be, the document may be delivered on the next working day. No later than 30 September of each year, the Union and the United Kingdom shall inform each other as well as, in the case referred to in point 4, the International Bureau of the Permanent Court of Arbitration, of the legal holidays applicable to the European Commission and to the Foreign and Commonwealth Office of the United Kingdom, respectively.
& /en 572 III. Appointment and replacement of members of an arbitration panel
7. If, pursuant to Article 171(5) of the Agreement, one or more members of an arbitration panel are to be selected by lot, the International Bureau of the Permanent Court of Arbitration shall promptly inform the Parties of the date, time and venue of the selection. The Parties may choose to be present during the selection. However, the absence of one or both of the Parties shall not preclude the selection from being carried out.
8. The International Bureau of the Permanent Court of Arbitration shall notify, in writing, each person who has been selected to serve as a member of an arbitration panel of his or her appointment. Each person selected shall, within 5 days from that notification, confirm his or her availability to the International Bureau of the Permanent Court of Arbitration and to both Parties.
9. Where a Party considers that a member of the arbitration panel does not comply with the Code of Conduct set out in Part B and for that reason needs to be replaced, that Party shall notify the other Party within 15 days from the time at which it obtained sufficient evidence of that member's alleged non-compliance.
& /en 573 10. The Parties shall consult each other within 15 days from the notification referred to in point 9. They shall inform the member of the arbitration panel of the alleged non-compliance and may request that member to take steps to remedy the situation. They may also jointly decide to remove that member and to select a new member in accordance with Article 171 of the Agreement.
If the Parties fail to agree on whether to replace a member of the arbitration panel other than its chairperson, either Party may request that this matter be referred to the chairperson of that panel, whose decision shall be final.
If the chairperson of the arbitration panel finds that the member of the arbitration panel does not comply with the Code of Conduct, a new member of the arbitration panel shall be selected in accordance with Article 171 of the Agreement.
11. If the Parties fail to agree on whether to replace the chairperson, either Party may request that this matter be referred to one of the remaining persons who have been jointly proposed by the Union and the United Kingdom to act as chairperson in accordance with the third sentence of Article 171(1) of the Agreement (the "selected person"). The name of the selected person shall be drawn by lot by the Secretary-General of the Permanent Court of Arbitration.
& /en 574 If the selected person finds that the chairperson does not comply with the Code of Conduct, a new chairperson shall be selected in accordance with Article 171 of the Agreement from among the persons who have been jointly proposed by the Union and the United Kingdom to act as chairperson, with the exception of the selected person.
IV. Financial issues
12. The Parties shall share equally the expenses arising from the establishment and operation of an arbitration panel, including the remuneration and expenses to be paid to the members of that arbitration panel.
13. The Parties shall agree with the arbitration panel, within 7 days of its establishment, on
(a) the remuneration and expenses to be paid to the members of the arbitration panel, which shall be reasonable and in accordance with WTO standards;
(b) the remuneration to be paid to assistants; for each member of the arbitration panel, the total amount of remuneration to be paid to assistants shall be reasonable and in any event shall not exceed one third of the remuneration of that member.
Such agreement may be reached by any means of communication.
& /en 575 V. Timetable and written submissions
14. The arbitration panel shall, after consulting the Parties, establish an indicative timetable of the proceedings within 7 days of its establishment.
15. The complainant shall address its written submission to the arbitration panel no later than 20 days after the date of establishment of the indicative timetable. The respondent shall address its written submission to the arbitration panel no later than 20 days after the date on which it has received a copy of the written submission of the complainant.
VI. Operation of the arbitration panel
16. The chairperson of the arbitration panel shall preside over all its meetings. The arbitration panel may delegate to the chairperson the authority to make administrative and procedural decisions.
17. Unless otherwise provided in this Agreement or in these Rules of Procedure, the arbitration panel may conduct its proceedings and deliberations by any means of communication.
18. Only members of the arbitration panel may take part in the deliberations of the arbitration panel, but the arbitration panel may permit the members' assistants to be present at its deliberations.
& /en 576 19. The drafting of any ruling or decision shall remain the exclusive responsibility of the members of the arbitration panel, and shall not be delegated to any other person.
20. The International Bureau of the Permanent Court of Arbitration shall provide secretariat services and other logistic support to the arbitration panel.
21 Where a procedural question arises that is not covered by this Agreement or by these Rules of Procedure, the arbitration panel may, after consulting the Parties, decide on the procedure to be followed, provided that the latter is compatible with this Agreement and with these Rules of Procedure.
22. If the arbitration panel considers that there is a need to change any of the time periods for the proceedings referred to in these Rules of Procedure or to make any other procedural or administrative adjustment, it shall inform the Parties in writing, after consulting the Parties, of the reasons for the change or adjustment and the time period or adjustment needed.
VII. Hearings
23. Based upon the indicative timetable established pursuant to point 14, after consulting the Parties and the other members of the arbitration panel, the chairperson shall notify the Parties of the date, time and venue of the hearing. That information shall be made publicly available, unless the hearing is closed to the public.
The arbitration panel may decide, in agreement with the Parties, not to hold a hearing.
& /en 577 24. Unless the Parties agree otherwise, the hearing shall be held in The Hague, in the premises of the Permanent Court of Arbitration.
25. The arbitration panel may convene additional hearings if the Parties so agree.
26. All members of the arbitration panel shall be present during the entirety of the hearing.
27. Unless the Parties agree otherwise, the following persons may attend the hearing, irrespective of whether the hearing is open to the public or not:
(a) representatives of a Party;
(b) advisers;
(c) assistants;
(d) interpreters, translators and court reporters of the arbitration panel; and
(e) experts, as decided by the arbitration panel.
28. No later than 5 days before the date of a hearing, each Party shall address to the arbitration panel and to the other Party a list of the names of persons who will make oral arguments or presentations at the hearing on behalf of that Party and the names of other representatives and advisers who will be attending the hearing.
& /en 578 29. The arbitration panel shall conduct the hearing in the following manner, ensuring that the complainant and the respondent are afforded equal time in both argument and reply:
(a) argument:
(i) argument of the complainant;
(ii) argument of the respondent;
(b) reply
(i) reply of the complainant;
(ii) counter-reply of the respondent.
30. The arbitration panel may direct questions to either Party at any time during the hearing.
31. The arbitration panel shall arrange for a transcript of the hearing to be prepared and delivered to the Parties as soon as possible after the hearing. The Parties may comment on the transcript and the arbitration panel may consider those comments.
32. Each Party may address a supplementary written submission to the arbitration panel concerning any matter that arose during the hearing within 10 days after the date of the hearing.
& /en 579 VIII. Questions in writing
33. The arbitration panel may at any time during the proceedings submit questions in writing to one or both Parties.
34. Each Party shall have an opportunity to provide comments in writing on the other Party's responses to questions submitted by the arbitration panel within 5 days after the date on which it has received a copy of those responses.
IX. Confidentiality
35. Any information submitted by a Party to the arbitration panel which that Party has designated as confidential shall be treated as confidential by the other Party and by the panel. When a Party submits to the arbitration panel a written submission which contains confidential information, it shall also provide, within 15 days, a submission without the confidential information and which shall be disclosed to the public.
36. Nothing in these Rules of Procedure shall preclude a Party from disclosing its own written submissions, responses to questions submitted by the arbitration panel or transcript of oral argument to the public, provided that, when making reference to information submitted by the other Party, it does not disclose any information designated by the other Party as confidential.
& /en 580 37. Hearings before the arbitration panel shall be open to the public except where the submission and arguments of a Party contain confidential information or where the Parties otherwise agree that the hearing shall be closed to the public. In such case the Parties shall maintain the confidentiality of the hearings of the arbitration panel.
X. Ex parte contacts
38. The arbitration panel shall not meet or otherwise orally communicate with a Party in the absence of the other Party.
XI. Urgent cases
39. In cases of urgency referred to in Article 173(2) of the Agreement, the arbitration panel, after consulting the Parties, shall adjust, as appropriate, the time periods referred to in these Rules of Procedure. The arbitration panel shall notify the Parties of those adjustments.
XII. Translation and interpretation
40. The language of proceedings before the arbitration panel shall be English. Decisions of the arbitration panel shall be issued in English.
41. Each Party shall bear its own costs of the translation of any documents submitted to the arbitration panel which are not originally drafted in English, as well as any costs relating to interpretation during the hearing related to its representatives or advisers.
& /en 581 PART
CODE OF CONDUCT FOR MEMBERS OF ARBITRATION PANELS
Definitions
1. For the purposes of this Code of Conduct, the definition of "assistant" set out in the Rules of Procedure shall apply. In addition, "candidate" means a person whose name is on the list referred to in Article 171(1) of the Agreement and who is under consideration for selection as a member of an arbitration panel under that Article.
Responsibilities to the process
2. Every candidate and member of an arbitration panel shall avoid impropriety and the appearance of impropriety, shall be independent and impartial, shall avoid direct and indirect conflicts of interests and shall observe high standards of conduct so that the integrity and impartiality of the dispute settlement procedure is preserved. Former candidates or members of an arbitration panel shall comply with the obligations set out in points 8, 9 and 10.
& /en 582 Disclosure obligations
3. Prior to the confirmation of their selection as a member of an arbitration panel under this Agreement, candidates shall disclose to the Parties in writing any interest, relationship or matter of which they are aware that is likely to affect their independence or impartiality, or that might reasonably create an appearance of impropriety or bias in the proceedings before the arbitration panel.
4. Candidates and members of an arbitration panel shall communicate matters concerning actual or potential violations of this Code of Conduct only to the Joint Committee for consideration by the Union and the United Kingdom.
5. Members of an arbitration panel shall at any stage of the proceedings before the arbitration panel disclose to the Parties in writing any interests, relationships or matters of the nature referred to in point 3 of which they are or become aware.
Due diligence of members of an arbitration panel
6. Upon selection, members of an arbitration panel shall perform their duties thoroughly and expeditiously throughout the course of the proceedings before the arbitration panel, and with fairness and diligence. In particular, they shall:
(a) consider only those issues that were raised in the proceedings before the arbitration panel and are necessary for a ruling, and shall not delegate this duty to any other person;
& /en 583 (b) take all appropriate steps to ensure that their assistants are aware of, and comply with, points 2, 3, 4, 5, 9 and 10.
Independence and impartiality of members of an arbitration panel
7. Member of an arbitration panel:
(a) shall be independent and impartial, and avoid creating an appearance of impropriety or bias, and shall not be influenced by self-interest, outside pressure, political considerations, public clamour, loyalty to the Union or the United Kingdom, or fear of criticism;
(b) shall not directly or indirectly incur any obligation or accept any benefit that would in any way interfere, or appear to interfere, with the proper performance of their duties;
(c) shall not use their position as a member of an arbitration panel to advance any personal or private interests and shall avoid actions that may create the impression that others are in a special position to influence them;
(d) shall not allow financial, business, professional, family or social relationships or responsibilities to influence their conduct or judgement;
& /en 584 (e) shall avoid entering into any relationship or acquiring any financial interest that is likely to affect their impartiality or that might reasonably create an appearance of impropriety or bias;
(f) shall not discuss any aspect of the subject matter or the conduct of the proceedings before the arbitration panel with one or both of the Parties in the absence of the other members of the arbitration panel.
Obligations of former members of an arbitration panel
8. All former members of an arbitration panel shall avoid actions that may create the appearance that they were biased in carrying out their duties or derived advantage from any decision or ruling of the arbitration panel
Confidentiality
9. No member or former member of an arbitration panel shall at any time
(a) disclose or use any non-public information concerning any proceedings before the arbitration panel or that was acquired during such proceedings, except for the purposes of those proceedings and in any case shall not disclose or use any such information to gain personal advantage or advantage for others or to adversely affect the interest of others;
& /en 585 (b) disclose the deliberations of the arbitration panel, or the views of any member of the panel.
10. No member of an arbitration panel shall disclose a ruling of the arbitration panel or parts thereof prior to its publication in accordance with this Agreement.
________________ ASSESS WHETHER YOUR BUSINESS TRADES WITH THE UK OR MOVES GOODS THROUGH THE UKIf it does:REGISTER your business with the national customs authority to trade with non-EU countries, if you have not done so yet. ASSESS whether your business has the necessary resources and capacitysystems, storage–) and holds all necessary customs authorisations to import or export. ASK your national customs authority which existing customs simpli˜cations and facilitations  CONSIDER applying for Authorised Economic Operator (AEO) status from your national customs authority. TALK to your business partners (suppliers, intermediaries, carriers–) as Brexit might also impact your supply chain.February 2019 CONTACT YOUR NATIONAL CUSTOMS AUTHORITY FOR THE LATEST UPDATES ON INFORMATION SPECIFIC TO YOUR COUNTRYIrelandhttp://gov.ie/Brexit https://www.revenue.ie/brexithttps://www.prepareforbrexit.com/brexitqueries@revenue.ieMaltahttps://customs.gov.mt/bus/what-does-brexit-mean-for-my-business-VISIT THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION™S WEBSITE FOR FURTHER INFORMATION AND FOR E˚LEARNING MODULES ON CUSTOMS AND TAXhttps://ec.europa.eu/taxation_customs/uk_withdrawal_enBREXIT CHECKLIST  FOR TRADERS Print     ISBN 978-92-79-99889-8     doi:10.2778/867580     KP-01-19-119-EN-CPDF      ISBN 978-92-79-99879-9     doi:10.2778/50098       KP-01-19-119-EN-N‚BREXIT PREPAREDNESS CHECKLIST™ FOR COMPANIES DOING BUSINESS IN THE EUSeptember 2019This checklist has been developed for information purposes and is meant to help companies doing business in the EU and/or in the United Kingdom (UK) to double-check their state of preparedness for the withdrawal of the UK from the EU without a withdrawal agreement. While care has been taken to address what would appear to be the most common issues and relevant aspects, the list is indicative and should not be considered to deal exhaustively with all matters that may arise as a consequence of a withdrawal without an agreement. Additional guidance should be sought from the ‚Brexit preparedness notices™ published by the Commission Services and information by national authorities. Some of the notices are referred to, by way of example, in the footnotes of this checklist. All ‚Brexit preparedness notices™ are available here: https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness/preparedness-notices_enCompanies have to ensure full preparedness for the withdrawal date, i.e. the date when the United Kingdom agreement, the ‚transition period™ agreed therein does not apply.and the EU Customs Union would cease to apply to the UK. Preparedness would thus be required in any case, albeit at a later stage.This checklist is a dynamic document, which will be updated, as necessary.   1. Placing goods on the EU market; exportsIn order to ensure product safety and the protection of public health and the environment, the placing on 1 by a body established in the EU or an authorisation by an authority of an EU Member State. This is the case, for example, for the medical devices sector, or the automotive sector2 .valid in the EU.body or authority, or sought new ones?have to be established in the EU (localisation requirements). This is the case, for example, for the ‚responsible person™4, the importer, or the registrant5 or marketing authorisation holder6 of certain goods. In some areas, such as chemicals,  this is particularly relevant for the ‚downstream use™ of goods. Post-Brexit, persons established in the UK will no longer comply with these localisation requirements.c. Labelling and markingsthe body or person referred to in sections 1.a) and b) of this checklist. This is the case, for example, for industrial products8,  pharmaceuticals9 and medical devices, and food10 and animal feed.Post-Brexit, those markings or labelling, when referring to bodies or persons established in the UK, no longer comply with labelling requirements when placed on the EU market11. 1       2  ) or the EU ecolabel (see ). 4   5   6   https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness/preparedness-notices_en#sante 8    9   https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness/preparedness-notices_en#sante 10  notices™ per sector. Have I ensured compliance with EU-localisation requirements?Have I ensured that products placed on the EU market are correctly labelled and marked?When exporting products to third countries with which the EU has a Free Trade Agreement, the products may ‚rules of origin™, documented with a proof of origin12. This is relevant, for example, in the automotive sector (incl. car parts or other components) and in the agro-food sector.requirements, i.e. the protection of the health, security and safety of Europeans, as well as the environment, all goods entering or leaving the EU are subject to customs supervision, and are subject to a customs procedure. Post-Brexit, this applies to goods entering/leaving the EU from/to the UK. An EORI number issued by the UK customs authorities, as well as customs decisions issued by UK customs authorities in the context of EU customs EU14.  15 that will apply post-Brexit, in particular if I have so far had little or no experience in trading with third countries?In order for certain foreign goods to be released for free circulation in the EU, import duties must be paid. The amount of this duty is calculated based on various factors, including the customs value (i.e. price paid or 16. Post-Brexit, certain goods originating in the UK are subject to import duties.  g. Prohibitions and restrictionsIn order to protect in particular the health and safety of EU citizens, as well as the environment, the import to and export from the EU of certain goods is subject to ‚prohibitions and restrictions™.  This concerns very 18 to medicines19 and from certain agro-food products20 to rough diamonds, cultural goods21 or certain radioactive material.22 Post-Brexit, the prohibitions and restrictions for imports from third countries, and export to third countries, apply in respect to the UK. Moreover, UK licences for the import/export of goods into/from the EU will no longer be valid.12
See also the dedicated ‚Brexit checklist for traders™ available here: https://ec.europa.eu/taxation_customs/uk_withdrawal_en#heading_1.14  15  https://ec.europa.eu/taxation_customs/uk_withdrawal_en 16  18  19  https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness/preparedness-notices_en#sante20  https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness/preparedness-notices_en#sante21   22   Have I examined my supply chains and treated any UK input as ‚non-originating™ from the EU, with a view to Have I assessed whether customs duties will be due post-Brexit (and can I provide the necessary information), in particular if I have so far had little or no experience in trading with third countries?Am I acquainted with the EU rules for prohibitions and restrictions that will apply post-Brexit, in particular if I have so far had little or no experience in trading with third countries?In order to protect food safety and animal health and welfare and to protect the EU™s sanitary and phytosanitary status, live animals , food24 and animal products and certain plants and plant products25 are systematically controlled, upon importation, in dedicated facilities (border inspection posts).  2. Provision of services in the EUEU rules, in many economic areas the provision of services in the EU requires a licence or authorisation by an authority of an EU Member State. This is the case, for example, in the transport sector26sector, in the audio visual sector28, and in the energy sector29. Post-Brexit, licences or authorisations issued by UK authorities are no longer valid across the EU. In some cases, validity in a given EU Member State will depend on national law.Does my business rely on licences or authorisations issued by UK authorities? Have I applied for similar As a client/customer, did I check whether my provider has the licence or authorisation required to provide services in the EU? b. Cross-border provision of servicesThe freedom to provide services Œ a ‚fundamental freedom™ enshrined in the EU Treaties Œ allows for EU-wide cross-border provision of services, within the limits of EU law. Post-Brexit, the provision of services from the UK to the EU will be subject to EU and Member State law, taking many business sectors, particularly if EU businesses continue to work with service providers established in the UK.Have I assessed whether I need to rely on services provided by entities established in the UK?Have I assessed whether I can continue to rely on cross-border services from the UK?24   25  26     https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness/preparedness-notices_en#move 28  https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness/preparedness-notices_en#cnect29  https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness/preparedness-notices_en#enerHave I ensured that the SPS commodities will enter the EU via a Border Inspection Post approved for the relevant commodity?In order to facilitate the free movement of persons and the provision of services, the recognition, in one by EU law.3. Other aspectsacquisition of goods or services takes place within the EU or cross-border with a third country. Post-Brexit, the EU-rules for cross-border supply from a third country apply.Am I acquainted with the EU and national rules applicable to cross-border supply to/from the UK? This is relevant for both services and goods.A unitary trademark and design, as well as an EU system of geographical indications and EU-rules on plant variety rights ensure the protection of these intellectual property rights throughout the EU.Post-Brexit, the protection granted by these rights no longer applies to the UK territory.Have I taken the necessary steps to ensure continued protection of my intellectual property rights in the UK?The recognition and enforcement by one Member State of judgements in civil and commercial matters handed down in another Member State is greatly facilitated by EU law.Post-Brexit, the recognition and enforcement of UK judgements will be governed by the (national) rules for third country judgements.Have I re-assessed a choice of UK jurisdiction in my commercial contracts?  . https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness/preparedness-notices_en#justd. Personal dataEU law provides for the transmission of personal data across EU Member States without additional requirements. Post-Brexit, the transmission of personal data from the EU to the UK is subject to the rules for data transfers to third countries. This is relevant for many business sectors, particularly if EU businesses continue to work with data-centres located in the UK.Have I taken the necessary steps to ensure compliance with EU rules if I transfer personal data to the UK?e. UK-registered companiesEU law provides for the recognition, in a Member State, of a company incorporated in another Member State40. Post-Brexit, the recognition of UK-incorporated companies in the EU will depend on (national) law for third country-incorporated companies.If my company is incorporated in the UK, have I checked against national law that having the central f. Direct taxationNational rules on direct taxation of companies have to take account of EU law, including harmonisation measures in certain cross-border situations.Post-Brexit, the rules for direct taxation of companies in situations involving the UK will be those applicable to third countries.Have I taken the necessary steps to ensure compliance with national rules for direct taxation where the UK is involved?40
MEMO/16/
UROPEAN COMMISSION MEMO 19 December 2018 Questions and Answers: the consequences of the United Kingdom leaving the European Union without a ratified Withdrawal Agreement (no deal Brexit)
This present document is for information purposes only
Citizens & social security
1. What will be the legal situation of UK nationals resident in the EU in case of no deal? Can they continue to work in their Member State of residence and travel freely across the whole EU? Will they need specific documents and can they apply already for those?
In today's Communication, the Commission has called upon Member States to act along the following lines regarding the rights of UK nationals to stay and work in EU27 Member States in case of no deal:

ake measures so that all UK nationals legally residing in a Member State on 29 March 2019 will continue to be considered as legal residents of that Member State without interruption;
tand ready to issue residence permits to the UK nationals concerned as evidence of their legal stay and right to work;
ake all necessary legislative and administrative measures to be able to issue temporary residence documents by the withdrawal date, and to process applications for definitive residence permits under the uniform format by the end of 2019.


In the second Communication on Brexit preparedness from 13 November 20181, the Commission had:
called upon Member States to include the periods of legal residence in an EU27 Member State prior to the withdrawal when assessing if a UK national fulfils the 5 years of residence condition;  recommended that Member States accept applications for residence
In addition, UK nationals who are family members of EU citizens having exercised the right to free movement will enjoy the right to move and reside  Finally, UK nationals resident in one of the EU Schengen states, who hold a residence permit, can travel freely in the Schengen area for short stays (up to 90 days outside the country of residence).
2. What will be the legal situation of EU citizens residing in the UK in case of no deal?
The Commission has called upon Member States to take a generous approach to UK nationals who are already resident in their territory. The Commission expects the reassurances given by the UK authorities  that, even in case of no deal, the rights of EU citizens in the United Kingdom will be protected in a similar way  to be formalised soon so that it can be relied upon by citizens.
3. Will periods of legal residence of a UK national in an EU27 Member State before the withdrawal date count towards acquiring a long-term residence permit in that Member State?
The Commission confirmed in its Communication of 13 November 2018 that, in the Member State of residence, periods of legal residence of UK nationals prior to withdrawal also count for the purpose of attributing EU long-term resident status to UK nationals (and their third-country family members) under the terms of Directive 2003/109/EC.

https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/HTML/?uri=CELEX:52018DC0880&from=EN

4. What happens, in case of no deal to the old-age pension of an EU27 citizen who is currently retired in the UK and receives an old-age pension from one or more EU27 Member States?
The Commission has called upon Member States to continue paying old-age pensions to EU27 citizens who are already residing in the UK on 29 March 2019 and remain there after that date. Nothing in EU law prevents Member States from paying pensions to beneficiaries residing in a third country.
5. In case of no deal, what happens to the old-age pension of an EU27 citizen who at one point worked in the UK before 30 March 2019?
The Commission has called upon EU27 Member States to ensure that EU27 citizens who worked in the UK for periods before 30 March 2019 retain their right for those periods to be taken into account when his or her right to an old-age pension is determined and calculated by the relevant Member State. Furthermore, the place of residence of the person entitled to the old-age pension, whether in the EU27 or in the UK, should not be of any relevance.
6. In case of no deal, what happens to old-age pension rights acquired by UK nationals from periods worked in (an) EU27 Member State(s) before 30 March 2019 if the person decides to retire in an EU27 Member State, the UK or another third country?
The Commission has called upon EU27 Member States to ensure that UK nationals
who exercised their right to free movement within the EU at a time when the United Kingdom was an EU Member State  retain their rights for their periods of insurance or employment completed in EU27 Member States before 30 March 2019 so that this is taken into account by EU27 Member States when determining and calculating their old-age pensions.



Transport
General
7. Why are you proposing contingency measures for aviation but not for rail transport? Are you treating modes of transport differently in case of no deal?
The withdrawal of the UK from the EU without a deal will cause disruption in all modes of transport, but to a different degree. In particular, some modes of transport benefit from an international system, which will remain in place in a no-deal scenario and provide limited, continued basic connectivity. Moreover, in many areas it is possible for economic operators to take preparedness actions. Contingency measures do not compensate for the lack of preparedness actions from stakeholders.
In aviation, there is no existing regulatory fall-back option that would allow the continuation of basic connectivity for air transport services between the EU and the UK. In road transport, the existing fall-back options (European Conference which leads the Commission to propose a contingency measure to ensure some basic connectivity for road haulage.
As regards the maritime sector, existing international rules will enable some basic connectivity. In general, EU rules already allow stakeholders and national authorities to prepare, before the withdrawal date, for a possible no-deal scenario by making sure that they obtain the relevant certificate from an EU27 Member State (e.g. railway undertakings can establish themselves in one of the EU27 Member States to obtain an operating licence or they can request safety certifications from EU27 authorities, airline pilots can apply for EU27 licences, seafarers can obtain recognition in the EU27 of the UK certificate, etc.).
For more details, stakeholders should consult the Commission preparedness notices on the various modes of transport.
Aviation  market access
8. Will there still be plane connections between the UK and the EU in case of no deal? What exactly is the EU proposing to ensure this? What will happen if the UK does not reciprocate the measures taken by the EU?
In case of no deal, the Commission is proposing that "point-to-point" flight connections, i.e. connections from the territory of the United Kingdom to the
https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness/preparedness-notices_en#move

territory of the EU27, are temporarily allowed on the basis of a unilateral measure. This measure will enter into force in case of no deal, if the United Kingdom reciprocates, and last until 30 March 2020. This is to avoid a full interruption of traffic between the EU and the United Kingdom. To ensure reciprocity, the proposal would enable the Commission to adopt appropriate measures, such as adjusting the allowable capacity available to UK air carriers, or requiring Member States to adapt, refuse, suspend or revoke the operating authorisations of UK air carriers, if the Commission were to determine that rights granted by the UK to EU air carriers are not equivalent to those granted to UK air carriers.
9. Why is the Commission limiting its contingency proposal to only ensuring basic connectivity between the EU and the UK (so called 3rd and 4th freedoms)?
A no-deal scenario will cause significant disruption. As mentioned in the Communication of 19 December 2018, contingency measures cannot replicate the benefits of membership of the Union, nor the terms of any transition period, as provided for in the draft Withdrawal Agreement. Basic connectivity refers to the level and volume of air transport services that will suffice to cover the basic needs of the Member States' economies and mitigate to some extent the impact of withdrawal, without however guaranteeing the continuation of all existing air transport services under the same terms as they are supplied today.
10. Will the Member States be able to conclude additional bilateral agreements with the UK in addition to the measures at the Union level?
An EU level response will be the best way to ensure that EU27 interests are properly protected in any scenario, including no-deal. In case of no deal, the EU legislation on basic air connectivity proposed today will be implemented. There will be no need for Member States to enter into bilateral negotiations. A unified and clear aviation relationship between the EU as a whole and the UK is largely preferable, allowing all European airlines to continue to operate basic air routes between any Member State and the UK and ensure a level playing field.



Aviation  ownership and control
11. In case of no deal, will EU airlines still be allowed to fly if they fail to meet the EU's ownership and control requirements at the time of the withdrawal?
As explained in the notice to stakeholders regarding air transport published in January 20183, in order to maintain the validity of an operating licence, and the freedom to provide intra-EU air services, all the conditions for the operating licence need to be respected, including being majority EU-owned and controlled. If the conditions are no longer fulfilled as a consequence of the be valid. Stakeholders have been made aware of the above since the early stage of the withdrawal process and are in a position to take all measure required to remain in compliance of EU law for the sake of business continuity. For more details, stakeholders should consult the Commission preparedness notices on air transport.
Aviation  safety
12.
What does the Commission's proposal on aviation safety concretely include?

extends for a limited period of time  9 months  the validity of certain certificates (in particular type certificates) that can only be issued by the European Union Aviation Safety Agency (EASA) on the basis of certificates issued by the UK once it is a third country;
ensures that parts and appliances, for which a certificate of conformity was issued by a UK company before the withdrawal date, can still be used in and on aircraft although the company that issued the certificate is no longer entitled to issue new certificates.
13. What should stakeholders do to mitigate the impact of a no deal as regards aviation safety requirements?
Many holders of UK certificates (e.g. pilots, mechanics, examiners, instructors, etc.) have the possibility to obtain, already now, a certificate from an EU27 Member State. There have recently been many applications filed with EU27 Member States to transfer licenses.
https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/file_import/air_transport_en.pdf
https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness/preparedness-notices_en#move

Where UK-based entities have to hold a certificate issued by EASA, companies are able to apply already now to as third country organisations. EASA has started processing certain early applications in order to anticipate the situation of the UK becoming a third country without a deal. Such certificates would  For more details, stakeholders should consult the Commission preparedness notices on aviation.
Aviation  security
14. Will passengers coming from the UK and transiting via EU airports have to undergo an additional security check in the EU airport? And what will apply to cargo operations?
The repetition of security checks in EU airports will be a great inconvenience to travellers and pose considerable burdens on EU airports. To mitigate some of this impact, as announced in the Communication of 13 November 2018, the Commission intends to use the existing possibility to recognise a third  regime as equivalent for a limited period of time, so that additional security checks will remain unnecessary in case of transfer/transit of passengers coming from the United Kingdom and transferring or transiting at EU airports.
Road  haulage
15. Will trucks be able to continue carrying goods between the UK and the EU if the UK leaves in case of no deal? Is there a restriction in numbers?
The Commission is proposing that operators from the United Kingdom are temporarily allowed to carry goods into the Union, provided the United Kingdom confers equivalent rights to Union road haulage operators and subject to conditions ensuring fair competition. This measure shall enter into force in case of no deal, and cease to have effect on 31 December 2019.


https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness/preparedness-notices_en#move

16. What will be the terms and conditions of cabotage operations in case of no deal?
In case of no deal, cabotage by UK operators in the European Union will not be possible.
17. Will passenger cars be able to drive between the EU and the UK if the UK leaves without a deal? Is there a restriction in numbers?
Passenger cars registered in the United Kingdom will be allowed to drive to the European Union and vice-versa. There is no restriction in numbers. The only condition is that the vehicles (and drivers) comply with the relevant rules of the 1968 Vienna Convention on Road Traffic (or the 1949 Geneva Convention on Road Traffic for vehicles and drivers from Ireland, Cyprus, Malta and Spain). For more details you should consult the Commission preparedness notice on travelling of 13 November 2018.

Road  Bus services
18. Will the EU take any contingency measures in this area? Would Member States be allowed to make bilateral agreements with the United Kingdom, to ensure the continuation of cross-border services?
The EU does not intend to take any contingency measures in this area. The UK has signalled that, following its withdrawal from the European Union, it intends to become a Contracting Party to the Interbus Agreement of 2002 in its own right, which is in principle possible. This would allow transport by bus or coach as occasional services to be performed. The Interbus Agreement only covers occasional services, but a Protocol extending its scope to regular and special regular services has recently been agreed and is being ratified, hence bilateral agreements between individual Member States and the United Kingdom will not be needed.


https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/brexit_files/info_site/travelling.pdf

19. Are UK driving licences going to be recognised in the EU in a no deal scenario?
In a no-deal scenario, UK driving licences will be recognised in the European Union (and vice-versa) on the basis of the 1968 Vienna Convention on Road Traffic (and the 1949 Geneva Convention on Road Traffic in the case of Ireland, Cyprus, Malta and Spain).
For more details you should consult the Commission preparedness notice on travelling of 13 November 2018.
Rail transport
20. Will train services continue between the United Kingdom and the European Union in a no-deal scenario?
To continue operating in the EU, train operators need an EU operating licence and an EU safety certificate, as well as train drivers licensed in an EU Member State. Currently its operating licence and safety certificate, as well as licences held by some of their drivers, are issued by the UK authorities and will cease to be valid in the EU27 as of the withdrawal date in a no-deal scenario.  The Commission's services have been in contact with operators on the need to fulfil the abovementioned requirements and to speed up the process in order to ensure the continuity of the service between the United Kingdom and the European Union in a no-deal scenario. This work will need to be completed rapidly to ensure the service continues running without significant interruption.  For more details, stakeholders should consult the Commission preparedness notices on rail transport.





https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/brexit_files/info_site/travelling.pdf
8 https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness/preparedness-notices_en#move
10 Financial Services
21.What exactly is the Commission proposing in the area of financial services?
After examining the risks linked to a no deal scenario in the financial sector, and taking into account the views of the European Central Bank and the European Supervisory Authorities, the Commission has concluded that only a limited number of contingency measures is necessary to safeguard financial stability in the EU27. These measures mitigate financial stability risks only in those areas where preparedness actions from market operators alone are clearly insufficient to address these risks by the withdrawal date. This is why the Commission has adopted today two temporary and conditional equivalence decisions prolonging the access of EU firms to UK central clearing counterparties (CCPs)
and UK central security depositories (CSDs) 10, for 12 and 24 months respectively.
In addition, the Commission is amending two Delegated Regulations in order to preserve the regulatory treatment of derivative contracts currently exempted from the clearing obligation and the bilateral margin requirements that EU law imposes, when such contracts are transferred from the UK to the EU27. Such flexibility would be granted for a period of 12 months following the withdrawal date.
22.Why is the Commission restricting itself to the measures proposed for certain derivative contracts and certain equivalence decisions in case of no deal?
As indicated by the Commission in the Communication of 13 November 2018, contingency measures shall be strictly limited to what is necessary to deal with major disruptions. They cannot offset some of the costs created by the application of two separate regulatory and supervisory frameworks, nor remedy delays that could have been avoided by preparedness measures and timely action by relevant operators. This is why, beyond the two identified risks, it is the responsibility of market participants to mitigate possible risks by timely adaptation to this new situation.
Commission decision determining, for a limited period of time, that the regulatory framework applicable to central counterparties in the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland is equivalent, in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 648/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council
10 Commission implementing decision determining, for a limited period of time, that the regulatory framework applicable to central securities depositories of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland is equivalent in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 909/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council
11
For more details, stakeholders should consult the Commission preparedness notices on financial services.11
23.Will banks and insurers with headquarters in the UK be able to continue to provide services in the EU in case of no deal?
In case of no deal, entities headquartered in the UK providing banking services will no longer be allowed to provide services in the EU on the basis of their current authorisations.
Similarly, in case of no deal, UK insurance undertakings will no longer be allowed to provide services in the EU, including through online sales, on the basis of their current authorisations.
Financial institutions that wish to provide banking or insurance services in the European Union should take all necessary steps to be properly authorised on withdrawal date, including by establishing presence in the EU27.
For more details, stakeholders should consult the Commission preparedness notices on financial services.12
24.Will I be able to use in the EU those payment methods issued in the UK in case of no deal?
In case of no deal, payment institutions authorised by UK competent authorities will not be allowed to provide payment services in the European Union, as of the withdrawal date, or through the use of branches located in the Member States, under their current authorisations. Entities headquartered in the UK providing payment services, as well as e-money issuing, will no longer benefit from the authorisation to provide those services and activities in the European Union..
The possibility to use payment methods depends on the respective preferences of merchants and international payment methods are usually recognised throughout the world.
11
https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexi
preparedness/preparedness-notices_en#fisma 12
https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness/preparedness-notices_en#fisma
12 Nevertheless, EU law sets limits to interchange fees charged to merchants in respect of intra-EU transactions. Thus they will no longer cover transactions between the EU-27 and the United Kingdom after withdrawal date and higher fees may be charged.  Provided that merchants are allowed to apply surcharges on consumers for card payments, this may lead to a higher surcharge for card payments.
For more details you should consult the Commission preparedness notice on travelling of 13 November 2018.13
25.In case of no deal, will I need to change my car insurance or follow any specific procedure to drive in the EU27 with a car insured in the UK?
If you travel to the EU27 from the United Kingdom with a UK-registered vehicle, you should make sure, prior to travelling, that your motor insurance policy covers the EU, as this might not be the case under the Green Card system, and that a Green Card is present in your vehicle14
For more details, you should consult the Commission preparedness notice on travelling of 13 November 2018.15
Sanitary and Phyto-sanitary (SPS) rules
26.What is the exact scope of the contingency measures on veterinary legislation and when will they be in place?
In case of no-deal, EU rules in public/animal health areas will no longer apply to the UK. Therefore, the entry of animals and their products from the UK into the EU will only be allowed if the UK is listed as an authorised third country in the relevant sectors of EU legislation.
The contingency measures announced in the Commission Communication of 13 November 2018 foresee that the UK will be added to the lists for live                                            13 https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/brexit_files/info_site/travelling.pdf
14 For more information, see the Commission preparedness notice on travelling of 13 November 2018, p. 20. 15 https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/brexit_files/info_site/travelling.pdf
13 animals and animal products, subject to providing guarantees that all applicable conditions under the veterinary or sanitary legislation will be fulfilled. In a no deal scenario, the listing of the United Kingdom should enter into force on 30 March 2019.
27.Will live animals and animal products be checked at the borders when entering the European Union from the United Kingdom after 29 March 2019 in case of no deal?
In case of no-deal, every consignment of live animals and animal products coming from the UK would have to undergo, as of the withdrawal date, checks in Union border inspection posts (BIPs) at the point of entry into the EU
For more details, stakeholders should consult the Commission preparedness notice on EU rules for food, feed and sanitary and phytosanitary controls.16
28.In case of no deal, are these checks also necessary if these products come from another Member State, but transit through the United Kingdom? In case of no-deal, simplified border controls (limited to documentary checks, for instance) will apply to live animals and animal products coming from a Member State but transiting through the UK. For more details, stakeholders should consult the Commission preparedness notice on EU rules for food, feed and sanitary and phytosanitary controls.17
29.Does the Commission have flexibility when approving the necessary Border Inspection Posts for SPS checks and how fast will approvals take place?  Certain flexibilities are provided for in the applicable EU legislation, e.g. accepting temporary premises for inspection rooms or sharing commercial facilities for the storage of consignments. In order to be ready by 30 March 2019, the new or extended border inspection posts must be proposed by the Member States to the European Commission before 15 February 2019.
16
https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness/preparedness-notices_en#sante 17
https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness/preparedness-notices_en#sante
14
30.What are the health requirements for pets accompanying holders that visit the EU in case of no deal?  In case of no deal, the "EU pet passport" issued before the withdrawal date to a pet owner resident in the United Kingdom will no longer be valid as of withdrawal date. Travellers from the UK are advised to bear in mind that they might need a health certificate including a valid anti-rabies vaccination and a valid rabies antibody titration test.   For more details you should consult the Commission preparedness notice on travelling of 13 November 2018.18
Customs
31.In case of no deal, will goods coming from the UK to the EU/EU to the UK be considered as imports/exports as of 30 March 2019? As of 30 March 2019, goods which are brought into the customs territory of the European Union from the United Kingdom or are to be taken out of that territory for transport to the United Kingdom, are subject to customs supervision and may be subject to customs controls in accordance with the Union Customs Code. This implies inter alia that customs formalities apply, declarations have to be lodged and customs authorities may require guarantees for potential or existing customs debts.
For more details, stakeholders should consult the Commission preparedness notice on EU rules for customs and rules of origin.19
32.Can I already apply for authorisations and access to customs IT systems or must I wait for 30 March 2019? Economic operators may already in advance of the withdrawal date apply for authorisations and access to customs IT systems at the competent customs authority. That is in general the customs authority of the place where the become applicable after the withdrawal date.                                            18 https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/brexit_files/info_site/travelling.pdf
19
https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness/preparedness-notices_en#tradetaxud
15 In particular, the Commission would like to draw the attention of those companies who were so far not involved in customs activities, but already trading with the United Kingdom as an EU Member States, on the importance of preparedness actions in advance of withdrawal date.
33.In case of no deal, what will happen to goods which started their transport before withdrawal date, but which arrive in the EU/the UK after? In case of no deal, these goods will be considered non-Union goods when they are brought into the EU customs territory. The UK will decide on how to deal with the goods entering their territory after its withdrawal.
Taxation
34.In case of no deal, will there be any tax refunds on goods I purchased in the United Kingdom and brought back to the European Union? In case of no deal, the UK will decide whether it will allow tax refunds for goods that are exported from its territory by EU citizens as of withdrawal date.
For more details, stakeholders should consult the Commission preparedness notice on indirect taxation,20 as well as the .preparedness notice on travelling of 13 November 2018.21
35.What rules will apply to EU-UK trade in terms of VAT in case of no deal? In case of no deal, existing EU legislation with regard to VAT will continue to apply within the European Union. As of withdrawal date, the rules of the EU VAT Directives relating to third countries will apply in the relations with the UK. This means that, in case of no deal, VAT will be due at the importation in the EU. Goods will be exempt from VAT if they are dispatched or transported to a destination outside the European Union, including, therefore, the UK.
20
https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness/preparedness-notices_en#tradetaxud 21 https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/brexit_files/info_site/travelling.pdf
16 For more details, stakeholders should consult the Commission preparedness notice on indirect taxation,22 as well as the .preparedness notice on travelling of 13 November 2018.23
36.What about goods that started their transport before withdrawal date, and arrive in the EU/the UK after? Will I be taxed twice? If these goods are transported to the European Union, their importation will be subject to VAT (and they will not be taxed anymore as intra-EU acquisitions).
Climate change
Greenhouse gases market mechanisms  ETS
37.Scheme (EU ETS) be affected?
Measures guaranteeing the smooth functioning of the EU ETS and the EU carbon market in case of no deal were adopted in February 2018.
They will ensure that, in case of no deal, UK operators would have fully complied with their 2018 obligations as of withdrawal date, and the system can function without participation of the UK after that date.
38.In case of no deal, will the UK be able to auction or issue allowances in the Emission Trading System? The Commission has decided to temporarily suspend, as of 1 January 2019, the acceptance of all relevant processes in the Union registry until the ratification process provides legal certainty on the participation of the UK in the EU ETS 2019 and 2020 compliance cycles. In other words, the UK will neither be able to auction nor issue for free any allowances or exchange international credits into allowances as of 1 January 2019 until the ratification                                            22
https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness/preparedness-notices_en#tradetaxud 23 https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/brexit_files/info_site/travelling.pdf
17 instrument of a Withdrawal Agreement is notified to the Council's Secretary-General by the European Union and the UK. Accounts in the Union Registry administered by the United Kingdom and accounts in the Kyoto Protocol registry of the United Kingdom will no longer be accessible as of the withdrawal date.
For more details, stakeholders should consult the Commission preparedness notice on EU climate policy.24
Application and entry into force of contingency measures
39.Will the contingency measures apply to Gibraltar?
As of the withdrawal of the United Kingdom, all applicable EU law will cease to apply to the UK and to Gibraltar. As a consequence, contingency measures addressing the United Kingdom will not apply to Gibraltar.
40.Why are the contingency measures different as regards their application in time?
The time limitations proposed for each and every contingency measure and/or proposal adopted today depend on the various situation of the sector concerned. For instance, regarding road transport, the time limitation takes into account the annual Council of the European Conference of European Ministers of Transport.

24
https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness/preparedness-notices_en#clima April 2019EUROPE DIRECT CONTACT CENTREphone number for citizensThe Europe Direct Contact Centre (EDCC) is for citizens who have questions about the European Union. The Contact Centre is able to answer by phone or email in any of the 24 official EU languages.Freephone from all EU Member States: 00 800 6 7 8 9 10 11. Online form: https://europa.eu/european-union/contact_enBrexitpreparedness, it answers to questions-scenario. To this end, it remains open over some weekends. 109,000 questions in 201827,000 questions between January-March 2019Approximately 1,300questions on Brexitbetween January-March 2019.This is the same amount of Brexit-questions of the entire year 2018.86% of questions directly answered85% of clients satisfied16%of questions from outside the EU40EDCC staff approximately14 seconds in average to pick up the phoneExamples of Brexit-related questionsA UK citizen living in France since 2010 is wondering what she must do to be able  to stay in France after Brexit.A football team planning to travel to Sheffield on 17-19 May wants to know whether they need a visa. A citizen wants to know if she could still go to the UK with her ID card in case of a no-deal Brexit.Do I have access to the European Court of Justice if my rights under the Good Friday Agreement are violated after Brexit?What would be the rights of UK nationals living in Spain in the event of a no-deal Brexit?How can I bring food, medicine and a pet into the UK after Brexit?How will the pension coordination between the UK pension authority and the one in Germany look like after Brexit(according to the different possible scenarios).Can you please do everything to keep the UK in the EU?Will the EU operating licenceof my helicopter firm become obsolete after Brexit?CountriesTopicsIf you intend to travel between the UK and the EU1 in the event of ‚no deal™, the following will apply:1. Border checks, visa and customs checks, VAT refund1.1 Border checks and visas- For UK nationals travelling to the EU2Will UK nationals be subject to additional checks?As a UK national, you will no longer be entitled to use the separate EU/EEA/CH lanes at EU border crossing points, and you will be subject to additional checks that you did not have to go through before the UK™s withdrawal. In particular, border guards may ask you to provide information, for instance on the duration and purpose of your stay, as well as on your means of subsistence during your stay. You will need to bring a passport, which was issued within ten years preceding the date of travel, and which The Commission has proposed that UK nationals can travel visa-free to the EU for short stays (i.e. stays of up to 90 days in a 180-day period), if the UK also grants the same arrangement for citizens from all EU Member States. Your passport will be stamped both when you enter the EU and when you leave it, so that this period of 90 days, which is visa-free, can be calculated. - For EU citizens travelling to the UK Will EU citizens need a visa to enter the UK?The UK has announced that EU citizens can travel to the UK visa-free for short visits of up to three months.As an EU citizen, you would be allowed to travel to the UK using your passport or, for the time being, your national The UK consular authorities of the country where you live are best placed to provide more information. EU Member States after the UK leaves the EU  Area TRAVELLING BETWEEN THE UK 1.2 Customs checksWhat about my luggage and goods?If you are travelling from the UK to the EU, you should be aware that:Your luggage and other goods will be subject to customs checks. The UK may apply similar requirements to EU citizens entering the UK;goods, plants, plant products, or certain animals. There may be similar restrictions to EU citizens going to the UK;If you carry goods in your luggage or hand-baggage, you will be entitled to duty free allowances (this Commission website:1.3 VAT refundsWhen travelling from the UK, can I get VAT refunds for goods I have purchased in the 27 EU Member States?Yes. As a visitor from outside the EU, you are entitled to a refund of VAT paid on goods you purchased during your stay in the EU, provided that the goods are presented to customs with the VAT refund documents when you leave the EU.2. Passenger rightsWill EU passenger rights continue to apply to EU citizens travelling to and from the UK and EU?Air passengers4a UK airport to an airport in the EU, and vice versa.from the UK to an EU airport.What about passengers with reduced mobility?mobility travelling by air when you leave from, transit through, or arrive at an airport in the UK. However, EU prevention of refusal of carriage and obligation to provide information).  -Ship passengersBus passengersRail passengersthe railway company is licensed under EU rules.3. Validity of tickets  date? EU passenger rights on reimbursement if:4. Healthcare when travelling  As an EU citizen, will I be able to use the European Health Insurance Card in the UK?No, EU citizens will no longer be able to access healthcare in the UK with their European Health Insurance Card.not, consider taking out private travel insurance.As a UK national, will I be able to use the European Health Insurance Card when travelling in the EU?No, as a UK national you will not be able to access healthcare in an EU Member State on the basis of the European Health Insurance Card. If you are insured in the UK and you intend to travel in an EU Member State, check with your health insurance travel insurance.5. Driving licencesIn the EU, the recognition of driving licences issued by third countries is regulated at national level. Therefore, you should check the national rules in each of the EU Member States in which you intend to drive. Some EU Member States require that you hold an international driving permit to drive in their country.You should check with the authorities of the EU Member State(s) in which you intend to drive regarding the rules for recognising UK driving licences.That depends on UK law. The UK has announced that you can continue to drive on a valid EU driving licence when you visit the UK.6. Pets Will there be conditions when travelling with pets? If you are travelling with your pet from the EU to the UK, you should check which requirements the UK intends to apply to people travelling from the EU. You may need either a third country pet passport, or an animal health If you are travelling with pets from the UK to the EU, you will have to respect EU rules on the movement of pets. These rules provide that the pets:Must have received an anti-rabies vaccination;Must have undergone a rabies antibody titration test;Must comply with any preventive health measure for diseases and infections other than rabies;7. Roaming  Will EU roaming rules continue to apply in the UK?be bound by EU roaming rules when operating in the UK. This means that these companies may apply surcharges to UK customers using roaming services in the EU, and to EU citizens using roaming services in the UK.The Commission™s preparedness notice on travelling;The Commission webpage on entering the EU from a non-EU country .  Reuse is authorised provided the source is acknowledged. The reuse policy of European Commission documents is regulated by I am a UK national living in an EU Member State. Will I still have  All EU Member States are preparing measures to ensure that UK nationals who are legally residing in their territories on the withdrawal date will continue to be considered as legally residing.nationals. Therefore, you will in principle no longer be covered by EU free movement rules. This means, for example, that even if you have acquired permanent residence in a Member State, this does not give you the right to move and live in another Member State. Your residence rights as a third country national will be determined by national legislation and EU directives concerning legal immigration. (see also next question.) All Member States should be ready to issue residence permits as evidence of your right to stay in that Member State and your right to work. These permits may be temporary for an initial transition period, but should gradually to take some administrative steps, depending on the approach chosen by the Member State where you live. Please Brexit preparedness website1.2. If you have lived in an EU residence permits before the withdrawal date. 1 2members3rules4. They will not be able to rely on EU free movement rights even if they have acquired permanent residence 5.Checklist for UK nationals and their non-EU family members:If you have not already done so, you should  national authorities6  of the Member State (for third country family members). is putting in place to ensure  (and their family members) and Brexit preparedness website7 . For more information, contact the relevant national authorities of your Member State of residence. as soon as these become available from the relevant national authorities. It is important to have these documents with you when travelling abroad.the EU free movement rules, when the UK was an EU Member State. Your situation will be governed by EU rules on third country nationals and national rules in the EU Member State concerned. While the situation will vary across Member States, many Member States are preparing to grant, for a certain period, a preferential status to down by EU law and national law concerning third country nationals in order to continue to live and work in an EU Member State. Your social security rights may also change. Member States on the 8 and on the EU Immigration Portal . As a UK national in the EU, you are advised to:seek information about rules and procedures to continue living and working there from the authorities of the Member State where you live; Family members who are either UK nationals or who have the nationality of another third country.4  family member or in the case of divorce.5 6 7 8 9 https://ec.europa.eu/immigrationobtain proof of the periods of work, residence, study and tax contributions in the Member State where you live;immediately apply for either temporary or permanent immigration status under national immigration rules.For more information, please consult the Questions and Answers on the consequences of the United Kingdom . EU Member State. You will fully retain your right to move and stay freely under EU free movement rules.Example State of which he or she is a national. 11.ExampleEU free movement rules. Your rights will be determined by EU and national immigration laws.10 11  As of the withdrawal date, you will no longer have voting rights in local elections in the Member State where you live based on EU law. It is up to each EU Member State to determine whether and under what conditions you may participate in local elections as a third country national. The Member State where you live may thus decide to grant you electoral rights as to any other third country national or based on reciprocity. You should check in the Member State where verify with the competent authorities of that Member State whether you are entitled to continue to serve until the end of the mandate on the basis of the national law of that Member State. should verify with the competent authorities of their Member State whether they are entitled to continue to serve until the end of the mandate pursuant to the national law of that Member State.as of the withdrawal date, but as for local elections, you may maintain that right if so provided for in national law. Reuse is authorised provided the source is acknowledged.  EU1I am an EU citizen living in the UK. Will I still have the right to live ﬁwants to reassure EU citizens and their family members living in the UK that they are welcome to stay in the UK in the unlikely event of a ‚no deal™ scenario.ﬂ24
The 5  >

The 8

A coordinated approach in the area of medicines and medical devices in case of a ‚no-deal™  scenario.The medical sector: A priority of the European Commission™s preparedness work from the start.The EU is prepared for a ‚no-deal™ scenario. EU legislation will allow us to mitigate the impact of such a scenario. What have we done?The Commission has called on stakeholders to prepare for a possible ‚no-deal™ scenario as early as May 2017. Since then, several preparedness notices and guidance documents have been issued on medicines and medical devices. These areas were also carefully assessed in the Commission Communications of July 2018 and November 2018. Economic operators are primarily responsible for taking the necessary measures to ensure their continued compliance with EU legislation. This is also the best way to ensure the continued safety and reliability of medicinal and medical device products in the EU and to avoid supply shortages in the case of ‚no-deal™. In addition, the following measures have so far been taken: Medicines: The Commission, the European Medicines Agency (EMA) and national authorities have been able to facilitate the transfer of marketing authorisations for medicines from one UK rapporteur competent authority to another. Notices, Questions and Answers, and Guidance documents on preparedness have been published by the Commission as early as May 2017. They have been regularly updated. The European Medicines Agency has been relocated from London to Amsterdam.The Commission has issued guidance to EU27 Member States on the timely transfer of batch testing sites from the UK to the EU27.A network has been put in place bringing together the Commission, national regulators and the European Medicines Agency to monitor the situation, address any problems of supply and inform patients and doctors accordingly. April 2019Medical Devices:  The Commission and Member States have been closely monitoring the progress of the transfers  (i.e. private entities designated by Member State competent authorities). placing their products on the EU27 market for a limited period of time. The Commission has issued guidance to EU27 Member States.  Managing potential shortagesThe risk of shortages of medicines and of critical medical devices in case of a ‚no-deal™ scenario has been MedicineŁ  National regulators, the European Medicines Agency and the Commission will monitor the situation, address problems and inform patients and doctors appropriately. This structure is built on existing strategies to deal with incidents and shortages.Medical devicesŁ and to identify critical medical devices that may be at risk of shortages. Ł What impact would a ‚no-deal™ scenario have on the EU budget?The impact of a ‚no-deal™ scenario will be felt throughout the European Union, but it is clear that some What contingency measures have been taken?The European Commission has therefore proposed a measure which would enable the EU to be in a contracts signed and decisions made before withdrawal, if:ﬁBrexit assistance packageﬂ: Additional Dedicated Funding How?AgricultureŁ Ł Private storage aid and withdrawal schemesFisheriesŁ Ł  Additional special measures (subject to possible adjustments):State aidData protection is of fundamental importance in the European Union. The EU has the strongest and most modern data protection rules in the world, which are becoming a global standard.In case of a ‚no-deal™ scenario, the EU has a comprehensive set of rules governing the transfer of personal data to third countries. This is the basis on which transfers will then take place with the United Kingdom (UK). These rules include in particular the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR), and the Law Enforcement Directive.Data transfers to third countries are possible under the General Data Protection Regulation using:Standard Contractual Clauses: Business operators can rely on these clauses for data transfers to third countries. Binding Corporate Rules: Legally binding data protection rules can apply within a corporate group.personal data if they contain binding and enforceable commitments by the organisation in the third country Derogations: Exceptions to the rule are possible on the grounds of explicit consent, performance of a contract, exercise of legal claims or important reasons of public interest (see below). DATA PROTECTIONApril 2019Practical steps to be taken by public authorities and companies when transferring data to the UK: Identify what processing activities will imply a personal data transfer to the UK.Determine the appropriate data transfer instrument for the situation.Implement the chosen data transfer instrument to be ready for the withdrawal date. Indicate in the internal documentation that transfers will be made to the UK.If relevant, update the privacy notice accordingly to inform individuals.Data transfers based on derogations: what are they for? Derogations, namely exceptions to the rule of having to put in place appropriate safeguards, must be interpreted  restrictively and be related to occasional and non-repetitive processing activities.  These derogations include cases such as: relevant risks.The transfer is necessary for the performance or the conclusion of a contract, or the contract is concluded in the interest of the individual.  The data transfer is necessary for important reasons of public interest (e.g. to ensure cooperation between authorities in social security matters). The data transfer is necessary because of compelling and genuine interests of the organisation.12345In a ‚no-deal™ Brexit, access to UK waters will be governed by United Kingdom legislation in accordance with international law. UK vessels will no longer have automatic access to EU waters, and vice versa. The EU has fully prepared for a ‚no-deal™ scenario. Two contingency measures have been adopted:    An amendment to the Regulation on the Sustainable Management of the External Fleets: this would ensure that the EU is in a position to grant UK vessels access to EU waters until the end of 2019, on the condition that EU opportunities, as agreed in the Agriculture and Fisheries Council of 17 and 18 December 2018. UK waters.   The Commission will work closely with the Member States concerned to assess the impacts of a potential loss of access to UK waters and to coordinate the use of a range of mitigation tools. This can take many forms: ranging from EU emergency measures to the use of temporary cessation aid by the Member States concerned.relevant criteria, within the existing framework, to assess the viability and scale of potential displacements in  FISHERIESApril 2019EU police and judicial cooperation in criminal matters is key to keeping Europeans safe. The EU has a comprehensive framework in place to ensure that police and judicial authorities cooperate closely in preventing and prosecuting crime and terrorism, be it through information exchange, judicial cooperation procedures or via EU agencies. genuine Security Union.Consequences of a ‚no-deal™ for the UK In case of a ‚no-deal™ Brexit this legal framework will, however, no longer apply to the UK. This means in particular that:The UK will be disconnected from all EU networks, information systems and databases; Judicial cooperation procedures will no longer be pursued in an EU framework; The UK will no longer be able to participate in EU Agencies. It will be a third country and will be treated as such. Switch to a bilateral and multilateral approach, and other measuresIn case of a ‚no-deal™ Brexit, cooperation between the EU27 and the UK will switch to already existing alternative bilateral or multilateral legal frameworks and cooperation mechanisms. The Commission has worked with Member States to ensure appropriate contingency action and to be prepared to use reliable fall-back mechanisms for any scenario, particularly regarding the following issuess: Disconnection from EU networks, information systems and databases;Transfer from the Schengen Information System to Interpol;Cooperation with EU Agencies including Europol, Eurojust and eu-LISA;Judicial cooperation on pending criminal cases (European Arrest Warrant, Transfer of Prisoners, European Investigation Order, etc.).  POLICE AND JUDICIAL April 2019The EU27 have been preparing, assisted by the Commission, for the switch to these alternative cooperation  ﬁFall-back instrumentsﬂ by the Commission1EU instrumentFall-backSchengen Information System (SIS)2Interpol databases (documents, vehicles) and notices (persons)Supplementary Information Request at the National Entries (SIRENE bureaux) channelInterpol channel, existing bilateral channelsEuropol3Interpol, bilateral channels, possibilities of exchange of data by way of derogations based on Article 25 of Swedish Initiative4 (general framework for sharing law enforcement information between Member States)Interpol, existing bilateral channelsSecond Additional Protocol to the European Convention on Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters from 2001 (ETS 182)UN Palermo Convention (transnational organised crime) ensures a minimum level of approximationFIU.Net (Financial Intelligence Units)Financial Action Task Force (international), Council of Europe Warsaw Convention, EGMONT secure web ARO (Asset Recovery Offices)5bilateral channelsEuropean Image Archiving System (FADO)6Interpol Stolen and Lost Documents Database 12-the Second Generation Schengen Information System (SIS II) by the services in the Member States responsible for issuing

18.12.2007, p. 103.EU instrumentFall-backCooperation on Football Disorder7Integrated Safety, Security and Service Approach at Football Matches and Other Sports Events (CETS 218)8Joint Investigation Teams (JITs)9 - Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters between Member States of the European Union10Second Additional Protocol to the European Convention on Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters from 2001 (ETS 182)Joint Action on Organised Crime11United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized CrimeEURODAC12None necessary; UK will no longer participate to the Cybercrime Directive132001 CoE Convention on Cybercrime (ETS 185) with 2003 Additional Protocol concerning the criminalisation of acts of a racist and xenophobic nature committed through computer systems (ETS 189)15Combating the sexual abuse and sexual exploitation of children and child pornography16Combating child pornography on the internet172007 CoE Convention on the Protection of Children against Sexual Exploitation and Sexual Abuse (CETS 201)187-tional dimension, OJ L 121, 8.5.2002, p. 1.
10-tance in Criminal Matters between the Member States of the European Union - Council Declaration on Article 10(9) - Declaration by the United Kingdom on Article 20, OJ C 197, 12.7.2000, p. 3Œ23; Council Act of 29 May 2000 establishing between the Member States of the European Union, OJ C 197, 12.7.2000, p. 1.11-an Union, establishing a mechanism for evaluating the application and implementation at national level of international 12criteria and mechanisms for determining the Member State responsible for examining an application for international protection lodged in one of the Member States by a third-country national or a stateless person and on requests for the comparison with Eurodac data by Member States™ law enforcement authorities and Europol for law enforcement purpos-1315OJ L 335, 17.12.2011, p. 1.1718EU instrumentFall-backbeings19United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Children; 2005 CoE Convention on Action against 20European Arrest Warrant2122231983 Second Additional Protocol to the European Convention on Extradition (ETS 98)2010 Third Additional Protocol to the European Convention on Extradition (CETS 209)252012 Fourth Additional Protocol to the European Convention on Extradition (CETS 212)European Investigation Order271959 CoE Convention on Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters (ETS 30)281978 Additional Protocol to the European Convention on Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters (ETS 99)292001 Second additional Protocol to the European Convention on Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters (ETS 182)302001 CoE Convention on Cybercrime (ETS 185)3119-2021  -dures between Member States - Statements made by certain Member States on the adoption of the Framework Decision, OJ L 190, 18.7.2002, p. 1.22 232527-28293031EU instrumentFall-back32 1990 CoE Convention on Laundering, search, seizure 332005 CoE Convention on Laundering, Search, Seizure Financing of Terrorism (CETS 198)Transfer of Prisoners351983 CoE Convention on the transfer of sentenced persons (ETS 112)1997 Additional Protocol to the Convention on the 372017 Protocol amending the Additional Protocol to the Convention on the Transfer of Sentenced Persons (CETS 222)38European Criminal Records Information System (ECRIS)39Article 13 of the 1959 CoE Convention on Mutual Assistance in Criminal MattersMutual Recognition of Financial Penalties40Criminal Judgments (ETS 70)323335-tion to judgments in criminal matters imposing custodial sentences or measures involving deprivation of liberty for the purpose of their enforcement in the European Union, OJ L 327, 5.12.2008, p. 27.373839European Union in the course of new criminal proceedings, OJ L 220, 15.8.2008, p. 32.Over 3 million EU citizens live or work in the UK and 1.3 million UK nationals live and work in the EU. The European Commission has consistently made clear that protecting the rights of citizens in a ‚no-deal™ scenario is a priority.In a ‚no-deal™ scenario, EU rules on free movement and social security coordination will no longer apply to and in the United Kingdom. As a result, we have put in place a series of , at EU and national level.EU27 Member States have prepared national contingency measures, coordinated by the Commission, to ensure  for UK nationals already legally residing in a Member State. The Commission and Member States are actively reaching out to UK nationals residing in the Union in order to inform them about their rights. UK nationals who already legally reside in a Member State for over 5 years may have access to the EU long-term resident status. The Commission has welcomed the UK™s policy that, even under a ‚no-deal™, EU citizens in the United Kingdom will be protected. This is a matter of UK national competenceWith the Contingency Regulation on Social Security Coordination, the Commission aims to ensure that social security entitlements in relation to the UK acquired by EU27 or UK nationals before Brexit are protected. Periods of employment and self-employment, insurance or residence, and facts and events that occurred in the UK before Brexit, will still be taken into account.The Contingency Regulation is: April 2019unilateral coordinated contingency approach for all EU27 Member States.The Coordinated Approach goes further than the Regulation, covering also:Exportation of old-age pensions to the United Kingdom;ongoing at the time of withdrawal;Medical treatment that is ongoing on the withdrawal date;UK but working in the EU27 provided by the United Kingdom before withdrawal.Individual Member States can decide to go further, for instance by continuing to export to the UK unemployment In the event of ﬁno dealﬂ, EU1 rules on consumer rights will no longer apply to the United Kingdom from the withdrawal date. Under certain conditions, EU consumers may however still be covered by provisions in EU consumer law if they purchase in the UK or from a UK trader.What are my rights as a consumer from one of the 27 EU Member States if I buy goods from a shop or website in the UK?Under EU law, if you conclude a contract with a trader in another country and it can be proved that the trader directs his/her commercial activities in your EU Member State of residence, the law of the Member State where you live applies. On that basis, courts in EU Member States will continue to apply EU consumer protection rules even if the trader is based in the UK.This includes in particular the rules set out inthe Unfair Commercial Practices Directivethe Consumer Rights Directivethe Unfair Contract Terms Directivethe Consumer Sales and Guarantees Directivethe Price Indication Directive the Package Travel Directive CONSUMER RIGHTS  IN THE EVENT OF  ﬁNO DEALﬂ March 2019Will I have to pay extra taxes or charges if I buy online from the UK?If you live in an EU Member State and you buy goods online, which have to be imported from the UK, you will have to pay import duty and other indirect taxes (e.g. VAT).All goods imported from the UK to the EU will also be subject to customs checks, including the application of prohibition and restriction measures.For further info, see:  https://ec.europa.eu/taxation_customs/individuals/buying-goods-services-online-personal-use_enAs a customer based in an EU Member State, can I sue a UK-based trader before a court in an EU Member State? If you are a consumer living in an EU Member State and you decide to take a trader in the United Kingdom to court in a Member State, the UK™s withdrawal has no consequences for you as long as the trader has marketed the goods in the country where you live. EU rules continue to apply and allow you to sue the trader in the EU If the UK-based trader has not marketed the goods in your EU Member State, your rights as a consumer will depend on UK law.Can the judgment of a court in an EU Member State be enforced in For the recognition and enforcement in the UK of a judgment from a court in an EU Member State (and of a judgment by a UK court in the 27 EU Member States) national rules apply in the EU and in the United Kingdom. In practice, this means that a judgment from a court in an EU Member State can only be enforced in the UK if a UK court decides to recognise the judgment.Will I still be able to settle a dispute out of court with a trader in the UK?apply to the United Kingdom. You will no longer be able to use the EU online dispute resolution platform to settle disputes with traders established in the United Kingdom. Will my package holiday bought from a travel agency in the UK That depends on whether the UK-based organiser from which you have bought the package holiday has marketed it in your EU Member State. If this is the case, the organiser would be obliged, as any organiser established in a third country, to provide insolvency protection for you according to the law of your EU Member State. If the travel agency in the UK has not marketed the package holiday in your EU Member State, your rights as a consumer will depend on UK law.Will Brexit impact the safety and quality of medicines put on the market in the EU?No. The UK™s withdrawal will have no impact on the high quality and safety that patients in the EU expect from the medicines they take. A medicine dispensed by a pharmacy or administered by a doctor in an EU Member State before the UK™s withdrawal.In principle, your access to medicines should remain unchanged. However, even the best preparation cannot fully exclude the possibility that there might be a temporary impact on the supply of some medicines.The European Commission and the European Medicines Agency are carefully monitoring the situation. Each national government has a role to play. In any case, shortages of medicines are unfortunately not rare and already happen are experienced in dealing with this and take the necessary actions so that patients get the right advice about their treatment. Which data protection rules do companies have to comply with when transferring data outside the EU?EU rules on data protection (the General Data Protection Regulation) allow for the transfer of personal data to a third country if the controller or processor has provided appropriate safeguards.These safeguards are:Standard data protection clauses. Three sets of model clauses are available on the Commission™s website:  https://ec.europa.eu/info/law/law-topic/data-protection/data-transfers-outside-eu/model-contracts-transfer-personal-data-third-countries_enBinding corporate rules: legally binding data protection rules approved by the competent data protection authority that apply within a corporate group;Approved Codes of Conduct, together with binding and enforceable commitments of the controller or processor in the country outside the EU where the data is transferred;or processor in the third country.© European Union, 2018 Reuse is authorised provided the source is acknowledged. The reuse policy of European Commission documents is regulated by Decision 2011/833/EU (OJ L 330, 14.12.2011, p. 39).ISBN 978-92-76-00446-2           DOI 10.2775/50558          NA-04-19-222-EN-CThe United Kingdom (UK) will leave the European Union (EU) on Friday 29 March 2019 at midnight. This   1. YOU NEED TO PREPARE FOR 30 MARCH 2019 1 January 2021Agreement. 30 March 2019. Therefore, all businesses concerned have to prepare, make all necessary decisions, and complete all required administrative actions, before 30 March 2019 in order to avoid disruption.SEVEN THINGS July 2018 3. CERTIFICATES, LICENSES, AND AUTHORISATIONS  4. CUSTOMS, VAT AND EXCISE  5. RULES OF ORIGINgoods.  6. PROHIBITIONS AND RESTRICTIONS           FOR IMPORT/EXPORT OF GOODS  2. RESPONSIBILITIES IN THE SUPPLY CHAIN1  2  This document is presented for information purposes only and should not be understood as a legal text. Its content is without prejudice to the negotiations on the Withdrawal Agreement and the discussions on the future EU-UK relationship. CHECK THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION™S          PREPAREDNESS NOTICESpreparedness notices1    WHERE CAN I FIND MORE INFORMATION          AND WHO CAN ASSIST ME?preparedness notices2sectors. They are meant to help all market participants prepare.departments and agencies active in the area that   7. TRANSFER OF PERSONAL DATAIn the case of ‚no deal™ you should know that as an EU citizen studying or training in the UK, you will be subject to UK rules on residency. The UK government has announced that you do not need to apply for any immigration status or visa if you do not intend to stay in the UK for more than 3 months. However, you will need to apply for ﬁEuropean Temporary Leave to Remainﬂ to stay longer than 3 months 1.I am an Erasmus+ student studying at a UK university on the date of the UK™s withdrawal. Will my learning exchange be interrupted? No. The European Parliament and the Council have agreed on a Regulation to ensure that ongoing learning mobility exchanges are not interrupted. The Regulation would apply to students in higher education, apprentices and pupils in vocational education and work and youth leaders.You should note, however, that the Regulation only covers learning exchanges starting before the withdrawal date. as an Erasmus+ student. Can I still go ahead?that would, if adopted, enable the EU to continue funding Erasmus+ in the UK during 2019. Whether you can go ahead would depend on a number of factors, e.g. that the UK continues to pay to the EU budget for 2019, on the UK host organisations (in your case the university) and on whether the activities end by 31 December 2019.  You should check this directly with the university.1 https://www.gov.uk/guidance/european-temporary-leave-to-remain-in-the-ukSTUDYING AND TRAINING IN THE UK IN THE EVENT OF ﬁNO DEALﬂMarch 2019My school is taking part in a cooperation project with a UK school, withdrawal?for funding under Erasmus+. However, the Commission has presented a legislative proposal to address the situation. If that proposal is adopted You should check this with your Erasmus+ National Agency2.under the Creative Europe Programme. The project includes a UK partner. Can this project continue beyond the withdrawal date?to participate in the Creative Europe programme. However, the Commission has presented a legislative proposal to address the situation. If that proposal is adopted You should check this with the Creative Europe desk3 in your Member State.I am a researcher carrying out research in a UK research organisation However, the Commission has presented a legislative proposal to address the situation. If that proposal is adopted 4 Member State or a non-EU country that is associated to the Horizon 2020 programme. Executive Agency.placement if it takes place in the UK or if a UK organisation is involved?organisation will no longer be eligible for funding under that programme. However, the Commission has presented a legislative proposal to address the situation. If this proposal is adopted You should check this with the organisation providing the funding for your placement.2 https://ec.europa.eu/programmes/erasmus-plus/node/2105 3 https://ec.europa.eu/programmes/creative-europe/contact_en 4 © European Union, 2018 Reuse is authorised provided the source is acknowledged. The reuse policy of European Commission documents is regulated by Decision 2011/833/EU (OJ L 330, 14.12.2011, p. 39).ISBN 978-92-76-00300-7           DOI 10.2775/437815          NA-01-19-224-EN-NHOW TO PREPARE FOR BREXITCUSTOMS GUIDE FOR BUSINESSES2It is now urgent that businesses in the EU start preparing for the UK™s withdrawal, if they have not yet done so.BREXIT WILL AFFECT YOUR COMPANY IF–  – it sells goods or supplies services to the UK, or   – it buys goods or receives services from the UK, or   – it moves goods through the UK.  WHAT DOES THIS MEAN?Without a transition period (as tabled in the Withdrawal agreement) or a WTO rules, without application of preferences, as of 30 March 2019.This means in particular that:Ł Customs formalities will apply, declarations will have to be lodged and customs authorities may require guarantees for potential or existing customs debts. Ł Customs duties will apply to goods entering the EU from the United Kingdom, without preferences. February 2019In the absence of a Withdrawal Agreement, which would put in place a transition period until the end of 2020 (with the possibility of an extension foreseen in the Withdrawal agreement), the UK will be treated as a non-EU country for customs purposes as of 30 March 2019.3Ł Prohibitions or restrictions may also apply to some goods entering the EU from the United Kingdom, which means that import or export licences might be required.Ł Import and export licences issued by the United Kingdom will no longer be valid in the EU (EU27). Ł , such as customs warehousing, issued by the United Kingdom will no longer be valid in the EU (EU27). Ł Authorised Economic Operator (AEO) authorisations issued by the United Kingdom will no longer be valid in the EU (EU27) .Ł Member States will charge VAT at importation of goods entering the EU from the United Kingdom. Exports to the United Kingdom will be exempt from VAT.Ł Rules for the declaration and payment of VAT (for supplies of services such as electronic services), and for cross-border VAT refunds will change.Ł Movements of goods to the United Kingdom will require an export declaration. Movement of excise goods to the UK may also require an electronic administrative document (eAD).Ł Movements of excise goods from the United Kingdom to the EU (EU27) will have to be released from customs formalities before a movement under Excise Movement and Control System (EMCS) can begin.WHAT SHOULD YOU DO?All businesses concerned have to prepare, make all necessary decisions, and com-plete all required administrative actions, before 30 March 2019 in order to avoid disruption.Follow the checklist below and get to know which practical steps you need to take as soon as possible to be prepared.4BREXIT CHECKLIST  FOR TRADERSASSESS WHETHER YOUR BUSINESS TRADES WITH THE UK OR MOVES GOODS THROUGH THE UKIf it does:REGISTER your business with the national customs authority, to trade with non-EU countries.this list: https://europa.eu/!Xr37YVASSESS whether your business is ready to continue trading with or via the UK by having the necessary:1. human capacity2. technical capacity3. customs authorisations, such as for special procedures ENQUIRE with your national customs authority about the existing customs that are available for your business, such as:1. 2. 3. 5CONSIDER applying for an Authorised Economic Operator (AEO) status from your national customs authority.If you are registered for the VAT Mini-One-Stop-Shop in the UK, REGISTER in an EU27 Member State.If you have paid VAT in the UK in 2018, SUBMIT your VAT refund  for them to be processed before that date.TALK to your business partners (suppliers, intermediaries, carriers,–) as Brexit might also impact your supply chain.CHECK e-learning modules on Customs and Tax to see CONSULT for more detailed technical information the European a wide range of topics, including customs and taxes.6CONTACTIrelandhttp://gov.ie/Brexithttps://www.revenue.ie/brexithttps://www.prepareforbrexit.com/brexitqueries@revenue.ieMaltahttps://customs.gov.mt/bus/what-does-brexit-mean-for-my-businessMalta.customs@gov.mt        Telephone: 25685120  /  25685123  MORE INFORMATION AND RELATED LINKSŁ Withdrawal of the United Kingdom from the EUhttps://ec.europa.eu/taxation_customs/uk_withdrawal_enŁ Factsheet ﬁSeven things businesses in the EU27 need to know to  preparedness-web_en.pdfŁ https://europa.eu/!Xr37YVŁ Page with preparedness notices on all topicshttps://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness/preparedness-notices_enŁ E-learning modules on Customs and Tax       https://ec.europa.eu/taxation_customs/eu-training/general-overview_en To get additional information and assistance, contact your national authorities, your local Chamber of Commerce and Industry, or your industry association.7NOTESKP-01-19-120-EN-CPrint ISBN 978-92-79-99932-1 doi:10.2778/56399 KP-01-19-120-EN-CPDF ISBN 978-92-79-99946-8 doi:10.2778/855499 KP-01-19-120-EN-NPrinted by the Publications Office in LuxembourgPage
of 19
Natolin, 29 March 2019

Check against delivery
Vice-Rector
Minister, Ambassadors, Students and professors, Ladies and gentlemen,
I am happy to be with you today, here in Natolin, at the heart of Poland and of Europe.
Vice-Rector, I must say that I feel indebted to your institution since several members of my team, including my deputy Sabine Weyand, graduated from the College of Europe, both from Bruges and from Natolin.
So, it is a pleasure to meet all of you, the future graduates, on this special day.
Today was long planned to be Brexit day
Page
of 19
This date, 29 March, was chosen by the UK government, when it notified its intention to leave the EU, just two years ago.
I
emerging and developed markets, we, Europeans, have strong reasons to be even more united, not divided.
But we have of course accepted the sovereign decision of the British people.  A Member State has the right to leave the Union. The Union is no prison!
The Union is not a place where countries have to stay against their will.
This is the purpose of Article 50. If there is a door to enter the Union, there should also be a door to exit. The EU must be a positive project, based on a positive political commitment. On contract rather than constraint
It is a project built by countries and peoples who chose to pursue shared dreams:   peace rather than war,   solidarity rather than isolation,   prosperity through cooperation rather than unregulated competition and
Page
of 19
It is also a project founded on shared values: human dignity, freedom, democracy, equality and, the rule of law. This is the heart of our Union, what unites us as Europeans. And the EU is a project based on law and principles, which promotes a rules-based European and international order.
Ladies and gentlemen,
choice. No spirit of revenge. No punishment. Never!
With the 27 Member States and the European Parliament, we have built ithdrawal
This was made possible by the strong unity of the 27. And I am glad that this unity remains very strong, as shown in the European Council last week and again today in my discussions with Prime Minister Mateusz Morawiecki.
This unity allowed the 27 to reach a deal with the British government  not against the British government  in November 2018. Our Withdrawal Agreement brings certainty on all the issues where Brexit creates uncertainty.   For EU citizens living in the UK  among whom there are about one million Polish citizens  and British nationals in the EU. If they decide to stay in the UK, they will keep their current rights, for the rest of their lives.
Page
of 19
For the many farmers, researchers, regions, businesses and universities in each of our countries who are carrying out projects financed by the EU budget. All commitments taken at 28 will be honoured at 28.
And for the problem created by Brexit in Ireland and Northern Ireland.
o This problem is not only about trade and customs. In order to protect peace and stability, both sides have excluded the return of a hard border.
o At the same time, as Press borders are Europes borders. Any goods arriving from Northern Ireland will be entering not just Ireland, but also Poland, France or Slovakia. Our Agreement makes sure that these goods respect EU rules, for instance for food safety, consumer protection and the prevention of animal disease.
This agreement required efforts on both sides. It represents a carefully balanced compromise.  It took two years to negotiate and it is not open for renegotiation.
future relationship, based on t, while preserving the integrity of the EU Single Market and the autonomy of the Union decision-making process.
In a joint political declaration, we agreed on a broad future relationship with a free trade area, sectorial cooperation, for instance in aviation, police and Page
of 19
judicial cooperation and cooperation in foreign policy, external security and defence. This is our common interest.
instance, we are open to work on the principle of a permanent customs union should the UK decide to take this path.
Besides, the UK will also be able to take part in EU programmes that are open to third countries, under the conditions and regulations that will be decided in the new EU budget for 2021-2027.  If the UK respects these conditions, and in particular if it pays its proper contribution, Polish students could be in a position to study in the UK
And British universities would still be eligible to engage in research projects with their European partners, under the EU programme for research and innovation.
Finally, we continue to be respectful of the democratic debate in the UK
On 15 January, the House of Commons rejected the deal that was agreed between Prime Minister May and the 27 Heads of State or Government. The UK asked for reassurances on the temporary nature of the backstop for Ireland and Northern Ireland.  We agreed to give those reassurances.
Despite the new guarantees, the House of Commons again rejected the deal on 12 March. Page
of 19
And it asked for an extension of the Article 50 period.
Last week, the European Council, under the leadership of Donald Tusk accepted this request.
A new vote will take place later today. In case of a positive vote, which would be the best outcome, the European Council agreed on a technical extension until 22 May, on the eve of the European elections.
The European Council also decided that, should there be no majority for the Withdrawal Agreement by today, the UK should indicate a way forward before 12 April.
Let me be frank: without a positive choice, the default option will be a no deal, which has become more likely. It was never our scenario, but the EU27 is now prepared.
The debates in the House of Commons continue. We are following it closely. What we now need is a positive choice to move forward.
It is the responsibility of each and every member of the House of Commons to tell us today what they want.
***
Page
of 19
Ladies and gentlemen,
For almost two years, we have managed the consequences of Brexit. But we also need to draw lessons from Brexit.  And ask ourselves why in 2016 52 % of the British people voted to leave the European Union.
I would like to share with you a few thoughts, analyses, ideas, expressing myself in a personal capacity, as an engaged citizen.
Why is Europe misunderstood and sometimes unpopular
Of course, there is the ideological view of those who argue, and will always argue, that one nation alone is better equipped to succeed in global competition than a Union of 500 million consumers and 22 million businesses.
Of course
in the 2016 referendum campaign there were some untruths
There was also a lack of information, as indeed there is in other countries. On what the European Union is, on its project, and above all on the benefits of being a member.  There was a terrible lack of debate on what would be the real consequences of leaving behind 45 years of cooperation and joint projects  we see the consequences of that today in the United Kingdom.
But that is not all. Page
of 19
There is also the feeling that Europe, its governments and institutions are not cerns.  A Europe that does not protect against the excesses of globalisation. That has for too long advocated deregulation and market fundamentalism. Without paying enough attention to the social and environmental consequences. A Europe that has not been able to fully control its external borders nor show solidarity in the face of migration crises. A Europe that has sometimes abandoned its industry and has not fully  And above all, the feeling that Europe does not hold out dreams of a better future for all Europeans
Again, this feeling is not unique to the UK. We need to listen to this feeling, understand where it comes from, and respond to it
By acknowledging that Europe has sometimes been wrong. And by rediscovering the foundations of a European project that allows each Nation, each People, each Citizen to feel protected, and part of a collective ambition
Ladies and gentlemen,
What has been, and what should be the re of the European project? The history of European integration is in fact quite simple. Page
of 19
Since the 1950s, since the Treaty of Rome, Europe has been the choice of facing the great transformations of the world and to take control of them rather than suffer from them, to be an actor rather than a own destiny.  To assert a common sovereignty, where the nation state alone is not enough. Finally, to pool resources across the continent to define common European goods. And carry out projects that are greater than all of us.  The European Coal and Steel Community, set up in 1951 after a war that had left our civilisation and our societies in ruins, allowed both the de facto the construction of a lasting peace that we have enjoyed for more than 70 years.
The common agricultural policy, launched in 1962, has allowed us together to regain food sovereignty, preserve diversity, the traceability and quality of products, and never to re-live hunger and ration books.
Cohesion policy, developed since 1988, notably under the Jacques Delors Commission, has made it possible for the most disadvantaged regions gradually to catch up as our Union has enlarged, building shared prosperity. to this.
The progress from a collection of national markets to a common marketcurrently continuing, has encouraged the growth of our businesses, especially our small and medium-sized businesses, while giving consumers more choice.
And since 1999, the single currency has facilitated trade among us and protected us against exchange-rate risk. We forget all too often that, by protecting us from American monetary hegemony, the euro is also an instrument of emancipation.
Page 10 of 19
We can be proud of all these common European goods
And we can be proud to have strengthened them over time, especially since
May 2004, almost 15 years ago, when Poland and nine other countries joined the European Union in a great moment of reunification of the European continent.  What other set of nations, what other Continent has so many collective achievements to its name? And yet, in many of our countries, political forces see the nation as the only
We need Nations, in particular to fight nationalism.  Each one has its national identity, its language, its culture, its traditions; Europe must respect them. That is what makes Europe so diverse. And at the same time we have common values that are the reason we are together. Today, once again and even more brutally than in the past, there are major global changes that we must face together. Faced with challenges such as climate change, migration, industrial and our nations alone,
If we want to meet these challenges, we must rediscover the ambition behind the construction of Europe and build new common European goods, shared by a community of 27

Page 11 of 19
Ladies and gentlemen,
At a time when, in each of our countries, thousands of young people are marching to defend the climate, is it not the role of the Union to defend it too
Climate change does not stop at national borders! It concerns us all:   Farmers are the first to suffer from floods and droughts.   City dwellers the first to suffer from poor air quality and all its effects on our health.
Faced with this challenge, building a green Europe must be a priority for the coming years. Together let us take on an ambitious goal: to make Europe the first carbon-neutral economy by 2050.
We have powerful levers at European level. We must make full use of them by applying a green priority in all our budgetary policies and through the full use of our regulatory powers.  In 2005 we set up what is today the largest carbon market in the world through the Emissions Trading System, the ETS.
We must get the CO
price right, and enforce it
including on imported emissions. The polluter pays principle should apply to all sectors.

Page 12 of 19
Ladies and gentlemen,
At the same time, this green Europe cannot be achieved at the expense of our jobs or social cohesion. Nor at the expense of our agriculture and industry, but working with them! There are a number of regions  I think of Silesia here in Poland and many others  that must be accompanied in this transition.  Industrial ambition is in fact a necessary condition for this ecological transition to succeed.
Green New Dealhe continent where we can and must achieve it.
Together we must invest massively in key technologies such as hydrogen, new-generation solar panels, green chemistry and batteries.
I read recently that 60 % of existing or planned automotive batteries are produced in China, 15 % in the US and less than 4 % in the EU.
We need to react! By using all the levers we have: taxation, green finance, and our investment capacity such as through
the European Investment Bank and if necessary a Bank for Climate
Together, we need to make our economy more circular.
Today, for seven tonnes of raw materials absorbed by the European economy, only one comes from the recycling of waste. This is not sustainable! Page 13 of 19
Let us start by launching a major plan of action against planned obsolescence, notably for mobile phones. 500 million Europeans have the critical mass to compel manufacturers to act.
Together, in the run-up to the Global Biodiversity Summit in Beijing, we must lead this battle, as we did on the climate with the Paris Agreement.  For years we have been warned about the disappearance of bees. And today we learn that one third of all insects are threatened with extinction
Our agricultural practices must continue to evolve, in the context of an open debate with our farmers about the modernisation of the Common Agricultural Policy, the development of our standards and protection against unfair competition from third countries.
On all these issues, let us never lose sight of the fact that the ecological debt we pass on to our children is at least as serious as the budgetary debt
That is why, in the same way as we have a Stability Pact for our budgets, our countries should respond to the challenges of the environment through
Sustainability Pact.
*

Page 14 of 19
Ladies and gentlemen,
At a time when China is asserting itself not just as a partner but also a also to implement a genuine industrial strategy
We are the most open continent for trade, direct investment and public procurement.
To be of real benefit to our businesses, this openness can no longer be one-way. Europe can no longer be naïve as it used to be
How can we explain that a Chinese or Indian company wins public contracts in Europe if our own companies are excluded from tendering in China or India? This is why I am pleased that the Commission put forward again in 2016 a regulation to impose reciprocity in public procurement, as I myself proposed in 2012 as Internal Market Commissioner. This proposal must now be made operational, and also more binding. The recently adopted foreign investment screening mechanism is also going in the right direction, but again, probably not far enough. Together we must strengthen th
toolbox of
That being said, ladies and gentlemen, we would be wrong to think that our successes or failures depend only on the behaviour of others. If we want a strong industry, we must first take up the challenge of our own competitiveness
Page 15 of 19
By investing together, which is still the best form of protection.
And also by addressing the fundamental issue of skills and human capital
In 2017, 43 % of Europeans lacked basic digital skills. This figure is not reassuring at a time when digital technologies are becoming the key to our competitiveness.
With artificial intelligence we are at the tipping point of a new world that will affect every aspect of our lives, from the way we work to our leisure time to our health. This is a formidable challenge. Here too, we cannot be content just to suffer from the changes that are coming
has set itself the target to train 1 % of its population in the basic concepts of artificial intelligence through public-private partnerships.
% of its population in the next three to five years? As we did with the Juncker plan, Europe should now launch a massive investment plan in digital skills Up-skilling Europe.  jobs that are at stake. And our productivity
GAFAs.
Today, the top 20 digital companies are all American or Chinese. One company alone, Amazon, invests 14 billion euros a year in research  which is more than the research and innovation programme for the whole of the EU! In Europe too, the time has come to scale up!
Finally, let us not forget the normative and ethical disruption of digital change
Through our single market, we still have the ability to impose fair competition and have standards adopted worldwide. Not only to protect our data. But also to defend our values and our democracy.  Page 16 of 19
Artificial intelligence and bio-engineering will increase the risks to our model of society and to our conception of the human. Let us not underestimate here again the need to act together.

Ladies and gentlemen,
I have talked about only two of the changes that require a collective leap forward. There are many others
At a time when the United States is withdrawing from the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty, when China is aiming to be the worlds leading military power by 2050, when Russia is gaining influence in is it not the role of the Union to do more for its defence
As President Jean-Claude Juncker often says, we cannot be content to fund 17 different systems of tanks with our national budgets, compared with the one single system in the United States. We cannot be content to have no operational EU headquarters level worthy of the name, when we know that the need for action at Union level, alongside NATO, will become ever more pressing.
Finally, faced with the challenge of migration, which is not about to disappear, is it not also Europe's role to ensure that our common external borders are under control?  Page 17 of 19
That we work together with the countries of origin on the root causes of migration, on defining legal channels and on combating trafficking.  And that in an area of freedom
without internal borders, each country takes its share of responsibility, particularly in the processing of asylum applications.
***
Ladies and gentlemen, dear students,
Whether we are talking about creating a green Europe, industrial strategy, a European defence or common responses to migration, Europe will not be built without you
graduates of the College of Europe
Even before coming to Natolin or Bruges, most of you studied abroad, thanks to the Erasmus programme, EU-funded research programmes, or simply the free movement of people in the Union.
All this probably seems natural to you. That we take it for granted is proof of what we have built together in Europe.  But let us not forget that these opportunities for exchange in a united Europe were unthinkable 30 years ago on both sides of the Iron Curtain
You are part of a generation of Europeans who live in peace. Which is free as no other generation before it. Page 18 of 19
Let us not forget that these achievements are still fragile. Sudden reversals are possible. They are even sought after by many political parties, in each of our countries.
If you want to preserve these achievements, this unique way of life in the world, take care of Europe!  Do not accept the status quo!  Share and defend your vision of Europe!  Whatever your ideas, get involved, especially in the coming debate for the European elections.  And, in your own areas of responsibility, in business, in public service, in education or in the voluntary sector, keep on getting involved and defending what you believe in
A few weeks ago on a train I met Mark, a British professor working in Amsterdam on European space policy. He summarised his regret about Brexit in one sentence. Eight words of dreams and regrets: Only together can we explore the solar system
What is true for the solar system is also true for climate change, the challenge of data, defence and the fight against poverty.  We all have our regrets and our dreams
. All I know is that each and every one of us has a role to play in maintaining the European dream. Page 19 of 19
As 27 nations we can and must launch new visionary projects for your generation and those to come.
What we do not do for Europe, nobody will do in our place.
Thank you for your attention.  Page
of 12
Speech by Michel Barnier at the EPC Breakfast Brussels,
April 2019

Check against delivery
Good morning ladies and gentlemen,
You have entitled this breakfast discussion
already have an agreement

It was concluded by Theresa May and the European Council on 25 November last year, both on the terms of the withdrawal and on the framework for the future relationship
The EU put a lot of effort into concluding that agreement.
We .  We tried to make sure that the UK could leave the EU in an orderly manner on 29 March, just as the UK had foreseen. Page
of 12
And, if the UK still wants to leave in an orderly fashion, this agreement is the best and only one possible.
However,
e package that we agreed is still being debated in the UK and the House of Commons. There were a number of important votes again last night
And the debate continue
Last Friday, 29 March, the House of Commons voted on the Withdrawal Agreement
separate from the political declaration
A majority of MPs voted against it
Some MPs have stated that they agree with the Withdrawal Agreement, but they cannot vote in favour of it, in the absence of a closer economic relationship
The House of Commons also consistently rejected leaving the EU without an agreement
However
the only way to avoid a
-deal Brexit is through a positive majority
We should continue to make this point in the public debate.
Ladies and gentlemen,
Since there was no positive majority for the Withdrawal Agreement before 29 March, the Article 50 period has been extended until 12 April
Page
of 12
The European Council was clear: the UK should now, more than ever, indicate a way forward
I see three possible situations in advance of the European Council called by President Tusk on 10 April:
1/ First, there is the possibility of a successful meaningful vote in the coming days
The House of Commons did not manage to find a majority, again, last night in its second round of indicative votes.  We will continue to follow how the process unfolds in the UK. On our side, we have always said that we can accept a Customs Union, or a relationship similar to the Norway model
In fact, the Political Declaration as it is today can accommodate all of these options already.  It leaves the door open for a variety of outcomes
But if the UK so wishes, w
are ready to rework the Political Declaration, as long as the fundamental principles of the EU are respected.
In any case, should the House of Commons vote in favour of the Withdrawal Agreement, this would not be the end of the process in the UK, which would still have to formally ratify the Agreement.
Page
of 12
I would expect that the European Council would not have too many difficulties in agreeing on a short extension for this process to take place. This is up to the EU leaders; it is not my decision.
On our side, the European Parliament also needs to ratify the Withdrawal Agreement. That is a necessary but also sufficient condition for the orderly withdrawal of the UK.
* Ladies and gentlemen,
If the UK Parliament does not vote in favour of the Withdrawal Agreement in the coming days, only two options would remain: leaving without an agreement or requesting a longer extension of the Article 50 period.
It would be the responsibility of the UK government to choose between these options.
2/ No deal was never our desired or intended scenario, but day by day it is becoming more likely. The EU27 is now prepared
Since December 2017, the Commission has reached out to all economic sectors and stakeholders. In particular, we have published 90 notices to help all businesses and stakeholders prepare, in all sectors.
We have also worked with the Member States, and the Commission just completed a tour of the 27 to make sure that no question is left unanswered. Page
of 12
National administrations recruited new customs officials.
They created new Border Inspection Posts for sanitary and phyto-sanitary checks.
They granted new licenses to financial services.
At EU level, we have tabled 19 legislative proposals. 17 have been approved.  The Union will be ready to manage any disruption for the public and businesses in the EU27.  All these measures are temporary, limited in scope and adopted unilaterally by the European Union.
The aim of these measures is to protect European interests, not to negotiate mini-deals with the United Kingdom.
For example, in order to avoid major disruption in aviation, the EU adopted a regulation allowing certain air services between the UK and the European Union
for a period of 12 months
and on the condition of reciprocity. This proposal ensures basic connectivity.
Another example: we also have now an approved EU regulation on protecting social security rights acquired before the withdrawal date.
Only two measures are still pending, on the 2019 budget, and on exempting British nationals from the requirement of having short-term visas.
Page
of 12
Not everything will be smooth. There will be problems. Being prepared means that all unforeseen problems should be manageable on the EU side

3/ Finally, the UK may ask for another extension
Such an extension would carry significant risks for the EU
Therefore,
strong justification would be needed
Many businesses in the EU warn us against the cost of extending uncertainty
There would also be a political cost
In any case, if the UK is still a Member State on 23 May, it will have to organise the European elections. It will have to nominate a Member for the next European Commission.
The UK would
At the same time, it would prepare its own future, for instance on global trade, on British agriculture, on financial services, to name but a few. Page
of 12

long extension cpose a risk for our decision-making autonomy

Ladies and gentlemen,
Over the last days and weeks, the no-deal scenario has become more likely. But we can still hope to avoid it.
Our objective remains to ensure an orderly withdrawal, which will create the trust we need to build an ambitious future relationship
In our
olitical Declaration, we agreed on a broad future relationship with a free trade area, sectorial cooperation  for instance in aviation , police and judicial cooperation and cooperation in foreign policy, external security and defence.
In an unstable world, marked with new challenges and geopolitical tensions, close cooperation is in our common interest
***
Page
of 12
Ladies and gentlemen,
If we achieve this objective, we would have succeeded in managing the negative consequences of Brexit.
But we also need to draw lessons from Brexit.
It is a question I tried to answer in some more detail in a speech at the College of Europe in Natolin last Friday.
We must indeed ask ourselves why in 2016
52 % of the British people voted to leave the European Union
Why so many of the younger generations who are pro-Europeans did not come out to vote? And why Europe was misunderstood and unpopular with an overall majority
Of course, there is the ideological view of those who argue, and will always argue, that one nation alone is better equipped to succeed in global competition than a Union of 500 million consumers and 22 million businesses.
Of course, in the 2016 referendum campaign there was misinformation
There was also a terrible lack of debate on the consequences of leaving behind 45 years of cooperation and joint projects; we see the consequences of that today in the UK
There were people who attacked core achievements of the EU, such as free movement of people and EU citizenship. Page
of 12
But that is not all.
There is also the feeling that Europe, its governments and institutions are not responding to legitimate concerns.   A Europe that does not prepare for, and protect against
the excesses of globalisation. That has for too long advocated economic freedoms without paying enough attention to the social and environmental consequences.
A Europe that has not been able to fully control its external borders nor stand united in the face of migration and refugee crises.
A Europe where we have often abandoned jobs and industries without creating the conditions for new ones.
And above all, the feeling that Europe does not respond to the dreams of Europeans or promise them a better future
This view is not unique to the UK.
We need to listen, understand where it comes from, and respond
Acknowledg
that Europe has sometimes been wrong.
ediscover a Europe that allows each nation, people, and citizen to feel protected and part of a collective ambition
Ladies and gentlemen,
Page 10 of 12
The history of the European project, of where it has been successful, is in fact quite simple. It is the story of when Europe chose to be an actor rather than a spectator of the great, often brutal transformations of the world.  It is when we have chosen to assert a common sovereignty where the nation state alone is not enough. It is where we have pooled resources across the continent to deliver on common European goods
Think back!  The European coal and steel community in 1951 consolidated peace and rebuilt our industry
The Common Agricultural Policy, launched in 1962, helped regain food sovereignty and never relive hunger and ration books.
Our cohesion policy, developed since 1988 brought new Member States into the fold with the promise of solidarity and shared prosperity. The reunification of our divided continent is one of our greatest achievements.
The Single Market launched in 1993 enlarged markets beyond national markets and developed this shared prosperity.
And since 1999, the single currency has facilitated trade and is also becoming an instrument of European sovereignty.
beginning, lies a set of shared values: human dignity, freedom, democracy, equality and the rule of law.  Page 11 of 12
This is the heart of our Union, what unites us as Europeans
We must be proud of all these achievements
But also realise, that today, perhaps even more brutally than in the past, we are facing major global challenges on which we must act together
Climate change, migration, industrial and technological disruptions, and terrorism are seismic challenges on which Member States cannot deliver alone. Our Union must be an evolving project.
We must be ready to deliver on new European common goods
A Green Europe, with the objective to become the first carbon-neutral economy by 2050, making our economy more circular and leading the battle i
protecting biodiversity.
A modern industrial strategy to show that Europe is open but not naïve, ready to invest in digital and artificial intelligence, capable of addressing the fundamental challenges of skills and human capital.
European defence, pooling our capabilities, as proposed by President Jean-Claude Juncker, and reinforcing our operational capacity to act together at home, in our neighbourhood and beyond.
An ambitious migration policy
to take control of migration flows coming to Europe, combining the protection of our external borders, the fight against trafficking, the definition of legal avenues and common responsibilities on asylum.
Page 12 of
These are just some examples of what we must now do at 27
Building on the unity acquired during the Brexit negotiations. In reality, today is no time for regrets. The world is fast outpacing Europe. Europe cannot remain obsessed by the past, when the rest of the world is looking to the future. What we do not do for Europe, nobody will do in our place.
Thank you for your attention.
---UK WITHDRAWAL BUSINESS EXPORT SCENARIOS

EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL TAXATION AND CUSTOMS UNION


Contents I. General Information ........................................................................................................................
II. Scenarios .........................................................................................................................................
1. Union goods exported from the EU27 exiting via OoExt in the UK...........................................
2. Union goods exported from the EU27 via the UK to OoExt in the EU27 ..................................
3. Goods exported from the UK to OoExt in the EU27 ..................................................................


2
I. General Information This document complements the Guidance note on Withdrawal of the United Kingdom and customs related matters in case of no-deal, and covers the main export business scenarios. Definition of the No Deal + CTC scenario As of 30 March 2019, 00:00 CET  A clear cut-off; as of the withdrawal date on 30 March 2019 (00:00 CET), the UK is disconnected from all EU IT systems, including for operations that have started before the withdrawal date.   On the withdrawal date at 00:00 CET, the UK will accede to the Convention on a common transit procedure and to the Convention on the simplification of formalities in trade in goods.
Abbreviations ActOoExt Actual Office of Exit CTC Convention on a common transit procedure DeclOoExt Declared Office of Exit ECS Export Control System EXS Exit Summary Declaration (pre-departure) ENS Entry Summary Declaration (pre-arrival) OoExp Office of Export OoExt Office of Exit

II. Scenarios  1.
nion goods exported from the EU27 exiting via OoExt in the UK
Export PL
Exit UK a) UK withdrawal when goods are in the EU27 territory b) UK withdrawal when goods are in the UK territory Sub Scenario a):  UK withdrawal  when goods are in the EU27 territory  Presentation of the goods should be done at an OoExt within the
ustoms territory of the Union (diversion
ActOoExt confirms the physical exit of the goods, then the goods can exit the EU  Continuation of movement within the UK under a UK procedure
Remark: As the UK becomes a Contracting Party to the CTC as of the withdrawal date, the goods may be then placed under a transit procedure as of that date, preferably already at an inland customs office in the EU27. That office would then take over the function of the ActOoExt.
Sub Scenario b):  UK withdrawal  when goods are in the UK
o rules for the exit of the goods applied
The goods will be exited under the UK rules
The UK will not be able to send any messages via ECS confirming the physical exit of the goods
he OoExp close
the export movement in ECS based on an alternative proof
2. Union goods exported from the EU27 via the UK to OoExt in the EU27
Export IE Exit NL a) UK withdrawal when goods are in the EU27 territory b) UK withdrawal when goods are in the UK territory c) UK withdrawal after goods have re-entered the EU2
territory Sub Scenario a):  UK withdrawal  when goods are in the EU27 territory  Presentation of the goods should be done at an OoExt within the customs territory of the Union (diversion)  An ENS shall be lodged at the customs office of first entry in the EU27
Following the re-entry to the EU27, to reach the OoExt point of exit from where the goods finally leave the EU customs territory, the goods have to be placed under external transit procedure or any other special procedure allowing for the movement of goods or move in temporary storage depending on the customs rules applicable to the actual mode of transport  A re-export notification, a re-export declaration or an EXS at the EU27 OoExt should be lodged
Remark: As the UK becomes a Contracting Party to the CTC as of the withdrawal date, the goods may then be placed under a transit procedure already in the EU27 territory as of that date (export followed by transit) and move via the UK to the point of exit in the EU27 from where the goods will finally physically leave the EU customs territory
Sub Scenario b):  UK withdrawal  when goods are in the UK territory  As of the withdrawal date, the goods lose their Union status  An ENS shall be lodged at the customs office of first entry in the EU27   Following the re-entry to the EU27, to reach the OoExt point of exit from where the goods leave the EU customs territory, the goods have to be placed under external transit procedure or any other special procedure allowing for the movement of goods or move in temporary storage depending on the customs rules applicable to the actual mode of transport  A re-export notification, a re-export declaration or an EXS at the EU27 OoExt should be lodged  The OoExp closes the export movement in ECS based on an alternative proof
6
Remark: As the UK becomes a Contracting Party to the CTC as of the withdrawal date, a T1 transit procedure may be started in NCTS as of that date from the UK to the external EU27 border where the goods will leave the EU customs territory. Sub Scenario c):  UK withdrawal  after goods have re-entered the EU27 territory  NL can exit the good
as declared

3.
oods exported from the UK to OoExt in the EU27
Export UK
Exit DE a) UK withdrawal when goods are in the UK territory b) UK withdrawal when goods are in the EU27 territory Sub Scenario a):  UK withdrawal  when goods are in the UK territory  Goods are subject to UK customs procedures when exiting the UK
s of the withdrawal date, the goods lose their Union status  An ENS shall be lodged at the customs office of first entry in the EU27   To reach the point of exit from where the goods leave the EU customs territory, the goods have to be placed under external transit procedure or any other special procedure allowing for the movement of goods or move in temporary storage depending on the customs rules applicable to the actual mode of transport   A re-export notification, a re-export declaration or an EXS at the EU27 OoExt should be lodge

Remark: As the UK becomes a Contracting Party to the CTC as of the withdrawal date, a T1 transit procedure can be started in NCTS as of that date from the UK to the external EU27 border where goods will leave the EU customs territory
8
Sub Scenario b):  UK withdrawal  when goods are in the EU27 territory  OoExt can exit the goods in its ECS application but will not be able to confirm the physical exit of the goods to the UK OoExp electronically
as the UK will be disconnected from the ECS as of the withdrawal date  OoExt should, upon request from the economic operator, issue a proof of exit

UK WITHDRAWAL BUSINESS TRANSIT SCENARIOS
EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL TAXATION AND CUSTOMS UNION

AND THE UNITED KINGDOM ACCEDES TO THE CONVENTION ON A COMMON TRANSIT PROCEDURE AND TO THE CONVENTION ON THE SIMPLIFICATION OF FORMALITIES IN TRADE IN GOODS

Contents I. General Information ........................................................................................................................
II. Scenarios  Destination UK ............................................................................................................
1. External Union Transit Procedure (T1)  Non-Union goods from PL via EU27 to the UK .......
2. Common Transit Procedure (T1)  Non-Union goods from TR via EU27+CTC to the UK,  International Union Transit Procedure (T2)  Union goods from TR via EU27+CTC to the UK ......
III. Scenarios  Departure UK ...........................................................................................................
1. External Union Transit Procedure (T1)  Non-Union goods from the UK via EU27 to PL .......
2. Common Transit Procedure (T1)  Non-Union goods from the UK via EU27 + CTC to TR, Internal Union Transit Procedure (T2)  Union goods from the UK via EU27 +CTC to TR .............
IV. Scenarios  Crossing the UK ..................................................................................................... 11 1. External Union Transit Procedure (T1)
Non-Union goods from IE via the UK to FR ........... 11 2. External Union Transit Procedure (T1)
Non-Union goods from IT via CH-FR-UK to IE,  Common Transit Procedure (T2)  Union goods from FR via CH-FR-UK to IE ............................. 13 V. Enquiry & Recovery procedure ..................................................................................................... 16


I. General Information
This document complements the Guidance note on Withdrawal of the United Kingdom and customs related matters in case of no-deal, and covers the main transit business scenarios. Definition of the No Deal + CTC scenario As of 30 March 2019, 00:00 CET  A clear cut
ff; as of the withdrawal date on 30 March 2019 (00:00 CET), the UK is disconnected from all EU IT systems, including for operations that have started before the withdrawal date.   On the withdrawal date at 00:00 CET, the UK will accede to the Convention on a common transit procedure and to the Convention on the simplification of formalities in trade in goods. Entry summary declaration  Exit summary declaration When a transit movement is launched before the withdrawal date, the safety and security data is not necessarily already included in the transit declaration. In some of the scenarios in this document, it will not even be necessary to lodge those data. For example in case of scenario 1.b) external transit between EU27 and the UK: the safety and security data is not included in the declaration, because the movement is initiated between EU Member States before the withdrawal date; then, the transit movement will already be in the UK when it becomes a CTC Contracting Party on its own as of the withdrawal date, so lodging the EXS is not applicable any longer
The ENS/EXS becomes mandatory when the transit movement arrives at the border of the EU27 after the withdrawal date, it is necessary to submit it then separately. The ENS/EXS should be lodged as soon as the trader notices that the truck will not pass the EU27/UK border before the withdrawal date
Nevertheless, the ENS/EXS can be combined with the transit declaration as it is currently the case.  Abbreviations CO Customs Office CTC Convention on a common transit procedure EXS Exit Summary Declaration (pre-departure) ENS Entry Summar
Declaration (pre-arrival) NCTS New Computerised Transit System OoDep Office of Departure OoDes Office of Destination OoTRA Office of Transit

II. Scenarios  Destination UK 1. External Union Transit Procedure (T1)  Non
nion goods from PL via EU27 to the UK
Departure PL
Destination UK a) UK withdrawal when goods are in the EU territory b) UK withdrawal when goods are in the UK territory Sub Scenario a):  UK withdrawal  when goods are in EU27 territory  The movement can continue as a T1 procedure in NCTS  At the external EU27 border (Example FR/UK) an EXS has to be lodged
On the UK side, an OoTRA has to be passed  This additional OoTRA has to request the relevant data with the IE114 at the OoDep and fulfils all the regular duties of that CO role
4
Sub Scenario b):  UK withdrawal  when goods are in the UK  The movement can continue as a T1 procedure in NCTS 2. Common Transit Procedure (T1)  Non
nion goods from TR via EU27+CTC to the UK,  International Union Transit Procedure (T2)  Union goods from TR via EU27+CTC to the UK
Departure TR
Destination UK a) UK withdrawal when goods are in the EU territory b) UK withdrawal when goods are in the UK territory c) UK withdrawal when goods are in a CTC country Sub Scenario a):  UK withdrawal  when goods are in EU27 territory (Example in DE)  The movement can continue as a T1/T2 procedure in NCTS  At the external EU27 border (Example BE/UK) an EXS has to be lodged, if not already combined with the transit declaration  On the UK side, an OoTRA has to be passed  This additional OoTRA has to request the relevant data with the IE114 at the OoDep and fulfils all the regular duties of that CO role

Sub Scenario b):  UK withdrawal  when goods are in the UK  The movement can continue as a T1/T2 procedure in NCTS
Sub Scenario c):  UK withdrawal  when goods are in a CTC Country (Example in RS
The movement can continue as a T1/T2 procedure in NCTS  At the external EU27 border (Example BE/UK) an EXS has to be lodged, if not already combined with the transit declaration   On the UK side, an OoTRA has to be passed  This additional OoTRA has to request the relevant data with the IE114 at the OoDep and fulfils all the regular duties of that CO role



III. Scenarios  Departure UK 1. External Union Transit Procedure (T1)  Non
nion goods from the UK via EU27 to PL
Departure UK
Destination PL a) UK withdrawal when goods are in the EU territory b) UK withdrawal when goods are in the UK territory Sub Scenario a):  UK withdrawal when goods are in EU territory (Example BE)   The movement can continue as a T1 procedure in NCTS Sub Scenario b):  UK withdrawal  when goods are in the UK  The movement can continue as a T1 procedure in NCTS  At the external EU27 border (Example UK/FR) an ENS has to be lodged   On the EU27 side, an OoTRA has to be passed  This additional OoTRA has to request the relevant data with the IE114 at the OoDep and fulfils all the regular duties of that CO role

2. Common Transit Procedure (T1)  Non
nion goods from the UK via EU27 + CTC to TR, Internal Union Transit Procedure (T2)  Union goods from the UK via EU27 +CTC to TR
Departure UK
Destination TR a) UK withdrawal when goods are in the EU territory b) UK withdrawal when goods are in the UK territory c) UK withdrawal when goods are in
CTC Country

Sub Scenario a):  UK withdrawal  when goods are in the EU territory (Example DE)   The movement can continue as a T1/T2 procedure in NCTS
Sub Scenario b):  UK withdrawal  when goods are in the UK  The movement can continue as a T1/T2 procedure in NCTS  At the external EU27 border (Example UK/BE) an ENS has to be lodged, if not already combined with the transit declaration  On the EU27 side, an OoTRA has to be passed  This additional OoTRA has to request the relevant data with the IE114 at the OoDep and fulfils all the regular duties of that CO role

10
Sub Scenario c):  UK withdrawal  when goods are in a CTC country (Example RS
The movement can continue as a T1/T2 procedure in NCTS

11
IV. Scenarios  Crossing the UK 1. External Union Transit Procedure (T1)
Non-Union goods from IE via the UK to FR
Departure IE
Destination FR a) UK withdrawal when goods are in the EU territory b) UK withdrawal when goods are in the UK territory c) UK withdrawal when goods are in the IE territory Sub Scenario a):  UK withdrawal  when goods are in the EU territory after crossing (Example FR)   The movement can continue as a T1 procedure in NCTS Sub Scenario b):  UK withdrawal  when goods are in the UK  The movement can continue as a T1 procedure in NCTS  At the external EU27 border (Example UK/FR) an ENS has to be lodged  On the EU27 side, an OoTRA has to be passed  This additional OoTRA has to request the relevant data with the IE114 at the OoDep and fulfils all the regular duties of that CO role 12
Sub Scenario c):  UK withdrawal  when goods are still in Ireland   The movement can continue as a T1 procedure in NCTS  At the EU27 border before leaving the EU (Example IE/UK), an EXS has to be lodged  At the EU27 border before entering the EU (Example UK/FR) an ENS has to be lodged  On the UK and EU27 side, an OoTRA has to be passed  Th
e additional OoTRA have to request the relevant data with the IE114 at the OoDep and fulfil all the regular duties of that CO role
13
2. External Union Transit Procedure (T1)
Non-Union goods from IT via CH-FR-UK to IE,
Common Transit Procedure (T2)  Union goods from IT via CH-FR-UK to IE
Departure I
Destination IE a) UK withdrawal when goods are in the EU territory b) UK withdrawal when goods are in the CTC country c) UK withdrawal when goods are in the UK territory d) UK withdrawal when goods are in the IE territory Sub Scenario a):  UK withdrawal  when goods are in the EU territory (Example FR)   The movement can continue as a T1/T2 procedure in NCTS  At the EU27 border before leaving the EU (Example FR/UK), an EXS has to be lodged  At the EU27 border before entering the EU (Example UK/IE) an ENS has to be lodged
n the UK and in IE an OoTRA has to be passed  Th
e additional OoTRA have to request the relevant data with the IE114 at the OoDep and fulfil all the regular duties of that CO role
14
Sub Scenario b):  UK withdrawal  when goods are in a CTC Country (Example CH)   The movement can continue as a T1/T2 procedure in NCTS  At the EU27 border before leaving the EU (Example FR/UK), an EXS has to be lodged  At the EU27 border before entering the EU (Example UK/IE) an ENS has to be lodged
n the UK and in IE an OoTRA has to be passed  Th
e additional OoTRA have to request the relevant data with the IE114 at the OoDep and fulfil all the regular duties of that CO role
Sub Scenario c):  UK withdrawal  when goods are in the UK   The movement can continue as a T1/T2 procedure in NCTS  At the external EU27 border (Example UK/IE) an ENS has to be lodged  In IE an OoTRA has to be passed  This additional OoTRA has to request the relevant data with the IE114 at the OoDep and fulfils all the regular duties of that CO role
15
Sub Scenario d):  UK withdrawal  when goods are in Ireland   The movement can continue as a T1/T2 procedure in NCTS

16
V. Enquiry & Recovery procedure  Enquiry procedure After UK becoming a CTC country, the enquiry procedure can be handled as described in the system specifications and in the Transit manual.  Recovery procedure After UK becoming a CTC country, the recovery procedure can be handled as described in the system specifications and in the Transit manual.


EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL TAXATION AND CUSTOMS UNION
Brussels, 11 March 2019
UIDANCE NOTE
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND CUSTOMS RELATED MATTERS  IN CASE OF NO DEAL The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. This means
the United Kingdom will
This guidance note addresses a situation where the UK becomes a third country on the withdrawal date without a withdrawal agreement and hence without a transition period provided for in the draft Withdrawal Agreement.
As of the withdrawal date, the Union rules in the field of customs no longer apply to the UK. The UK will be treated as any other third country with which the EU does not have any preferential trade relationship or customs or other agreements or arrangements
Preferences shall not be granted either to goods originating in the Overseas Countries and Territories which have special relations with the UK and are listed in Annex II of the TFEU (UK OCTs).
As of that date, appropriate rules in the field of customs, including the common customs tariff, and EU commercial policy measures will apply to the UK.  Furthermore, the UK will no longer have access to the EU customs IT systems.
In accordance with Article 50(3) of the Treaty on European Union, the European Council, in agreement with the United Kingdom, may unanimously decide that the Treaties cease to apply at a later date.
A third country is a country not member of the EU.
Cf. Part four of the Agreement on the withdrawal of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland from the European Union and the European Atomic Energy Community (OJ, C 66 I, 19.2.2019, p.
.
4
The UK OCTs listed in Annex II of the TFEU are: Anguilla, Cayman Islands, Falkland Islands, South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands, Montserrat, Pitcairn, Saint Helena and Dependencies, British Antarctic Territory, British Indian Ocean Territory, Turks and Caicos Islands, British Virgin Islands and Bermuda.
2
This guidance note aims to give guidance on the consequences for customs processes as of the withdrawal date
and should be read in conjunction with the Guidance note on excise issues.
1.
CONOMIC OPERATOR REGISTRATION IDENTIFICATION (EORI
a) Following the withdrawal of the UK the trade patterns of persons, established in the Union, who currently carr
out transaction
only with economic operators or other persons in the UK might change. While they are currently not involved in trade with third countries but only in intra-Union transactions, and hence have not been assigned an EORI number by any MS, they will carry out transactions requiring customs formalities. This requires, according to UCC
legislation, them to register with customs authorities in the Member State where they are established
Nothing prevents those economic operators to submit the required data or undertake the necessary steps for the registration (Annex 12-01 UCC DA8) already in advance of the withdrawal date
b) Two categories of persons currently established in the UK or registered with a UK EORI number need to be distinguished
Persons who are currently not involved in trade with third countries but only in intra-Union transactions
and who hence have not been assigned an EORI number by any MS, but as of the withdrawal date intend to carry out transactions requiring customs formalities, which, according to UCC legislation, requires them to be registered with customs authorities in the Union.   Economic operators and other persons, including third country operators, who have a currently valid EORI number assigned by the UK customs authority which will be invalid in the EU27 as of the withdrawal date
In this case, economic operators must be aware of the fact that they have to register with the competent customs authorit
in the EU27 and to use the new EORI number when applying for a customs decision after the withdrawal. Following the withdrawal, economic operators established in the UK or in another third country, have to register according to Article 9(2) UCC with the competent customs authority in a Member State. Economic operators that have a permanent business establishment in a Member State as defined in Article 5(32) UCC have to register with the customs authorities in the Member State where the permanent
This guidance note further complements the "Notices to stakeholders" published by the Commission services in the area of EU customs law (https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness/preparedness-notices_en#tradetaxud).
See https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness/preparedness-notices_en#tradetaxud.
Regulation (EU) No 952/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 9 October 2013 laying down the Union Customs Code
OJ L 269, 10.10.2013, p. 1).
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2015/2446 of 28 July 2015 supplementing Regulation (EU) No 952/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council as regards detailed rules concerning certain provisions of the Union Customs Code (OJ L 343, 29.12.2015, p. 1).
3
business establishment is situated. Economic operators that do not have a permanent business establishment in a Member State have to register in the Member State responsible for the place where they first lodge a declaration or apply for a decision; in addition, those economic operators need to appoint a fiscal representative, where required by current legislation
Nothing prevents also those economic operators to submit the required data or undertake the necessary steps for the registration (Annex 12-01 UCC DA) already in advance of the withdrawal date. Customs authorities of the Member States should accept requests already before the withdrawal date and assign to them EORI numbers with the withdrawal date as the starting date "YYYYMMDD
or thereafter, according to the requests of the persons concerned. 2.
USTOMS DECISIONS  2.1 Authorisations  The impact of the UK withdrawal on authorisations depends on the type of authorisation including the issuing customs authority, the holder of the authorisation and the geographical coverage.  Authorisations granted by UK customs authorities As a rule, any authorisation already granted by UK customs authorities are no longer valid in the EU27 as of the withdrawal date. The customs authorities of the UK are no longer an EUcompetent customs authority as of that date.
hen the UK accedes to the Convention on a common transit procedure
(CTC) as a Contracting Party in its own right as of the withdrawal date
authorisations granted by the UK for transit simplifications10 will no longer be valid in the EU27 Customs Decisions system, but need to be treated in the UK's national system as a Contracting Party to the CTC.  Authorisations granted by the EU27 customs authorities In general, authorisations granted by an EU27 customs authority will remain valid but need to be amended by the customs authority on their own initiative or following an application to amend from the economic operator in view of the geographical coverage or elements of the authorisation related to the UK and be amended as appropriate.11 However, authorisations granted to economic operators with UK EORI numbers are no longer valid in the EU27 as of the withdrawal date, unless the
OJ L 226, 13.8.1987, p. 2, as last amended by Decision 1/2017, OJ L 8, 12.1.2018, p 1. 10
Authorisations for comprehensive guarantee including waiver and authorisation
to use the electronic transport document (ETD) as a transit declaration for goods carried by air as authorisations with a link to the EU27
The use of the comprehensive guarantee requires a recalculation of the reference amount due to the changes of the customs status of the goods to be covered under common transit. 11
See Article 23(4)(a) UCC, Article 15 UCC DA.
4
economic operat
is established in the EU27, has the possibility to obtain an EU27 EORI and to apply for an amendment of the authorisation to include the new EU27 EORI instead of the UK EORI number. In order to facilitate the preparation by the stakeholders, it is also possible for the customs authority to amend authorisation
without a prior application. Th
authorisations granted to economic operators with EU27 EORI numbers, which are currently also valid in the UK need to be amended in order to take account of the withdrawal and the corresponding geographical coverage, e.g. in the authorisation concerning the Regular Shipping Service, the routes containing UK ports will have to be deleted.
Single Authorisation for Simplified Procedures (SASP) which today cover
the UK and a single MS will no longer be valid as of the withdrawal date. Nonetheless, it might be amended and could become a national authorisation
Where a SASP authorisation covers the UK and more than one EU27 Member State, that authorisation remains valid, but needs to be amended. In case the SASP authorisation covers simplified declarations, it should be noted that the economic operator needs to submit the supplementary declaration covering also the UK only for the period until the da
before the withdrawal date; a separate supplementary declaration covering the remaining Member States only has to be made for any remaining days of that calendar month
Authorisations to use the comprehensive guarantee where the guarantor is established in the UK will be suspended until the economic operator has replaced the UK guarantor by a guarantor established in the EU27
The use of the comprehensive guarantee requires a recalculation of the reference amount due to the changes of the customs status of the goods to be covered under common transit. Economic operators who currently do not require authorisations but whose situation will change as of the withdrawal date need to apply for the relevant authorisation. Operators who are currently holder
of authorisations granted by UK customs authorities and who draw the conclusion that they will meet the UCC requirements after the withdrawal need to apply for the relevant authorisations to the
27 customs authorities. The applications may already be submitted in advance of the withdrawal date to allow the competent customs authority to prepare taking the decision. In any case, the decision shall only take effect as of the withdrawal date at the earliest. This applies also to economic operators who are currently registered with a UK EORI, and have an EU27 Member State EORI number with a future starting date. In their case, however, the Customs Decision System (CDS) does not accept an EORI number, which will become valid only in the future, while it allows for a future validity date of the authorisation. Consequently, applications for authorisations, which are covered by CDS12 and submitted by those economic operators
have to be dealt with outside CDS. As of the withdrawal date, when the EORI becomes valid, the authorisation should be entered into the system.                                                            12 See Article 5 of Implementing Regulation 2017/2089, OJ L 297, 15.11.2017, p. 13.
5
2.2
ecision
relating to binding tariff information
BTI decisions
A decision relating to binding tariff information
BTI decision
is an official written decision issued by a customs authority which provides the applicant with an assessment of the classification of goods in the EU tariff nomenclature prior to an import or export procedure. The BTI decision is binding on all the EU customs authorities and the holder of the decision. The BTI decisions already issued by the customs authorities of the UK will no longer be valid in the EU27 as of the withdrawal date.  Any BTI applications submitted to the customs authorities of the UK or applications by or on behalf of persons holding a UK's EORI number made to the customs authorities of other Member States before the withdrawal date, but not processed before that date, shall not result in BTI decisions as of the withdrawal date.  The BTI decisions issued by the customs authorities of the EU27 Member States to holders with UK EORI numbers will no longer be valid as of the withdrawal date as the EORI numbers will no longer be valid in the customs territory of the Union and as BTI decisions may not be amended (Article 34(6) UCC). This will be reflected automatically in the EBTI-3 system. Those BTI decision holders shall register with the customs authorities in accordance with Article 9(2) and (3) UCC and Article 6 UCC DA to obtain a valid EORI number before applying for a new BTI decision in the EU27. The applicant could request a reissuing of his previous BTI decision by including a reference thereto in the application form.  2.3
ecision
relating to binding origin information
BOI decisions
A decision relating to binding origin information (BOI decision) is a written decision by a customs authority taken upon application, which provides its holder with a determination of the origin of goods prior to an import or export procedure. The BOI decision is binding on all the customs authorities in the EU and on the holder of the decision. The BOI decisions already issued by the customs authorities of the UK will no longer be valid in the EU27 as of the withdrawal date.  Any applications for BOI decisions submitted to the customs authorities of the UK or applications by or on behalf of persons holding a UK's EORI number made to the customs authorities of other Member States before the withdrawal date, but not processed before that date, shall not result in BOI decisions as of the withdrawal date.  In addition, with a view to taking BOI decisions as of the withdrawal date, the customs authorities of the EU27 shall not consider UK inputs (materials or processing operations) as having an 'EU origin' (for non-preferential purpose) or being of goods incorporating those inputs. The BOI decisions issued by the customs authorities of the EU27 to holders with UK EORI numbers will no longer be valid as of the withdrawal date, as the EORI numbers will no longer be valid in the customs territory of the Union insofar as BOI decisions
may not be amended (Article 34(6) UCC). Those BOI decision holders have the possibility to register with the customs authorities to obtain a valid EORI number before applying for a new BOI decision in the EU27. BOIs issued before the withdrawal date referred to goods including UK inputs (materials or processing operations) which were determinant for the acquisition of origin will no longer be valid as of the withdrawal date
3.
AGGAGE TAGS A baggage tag as set out in Annex 12-03 UCC IA may be affixed on hold baggage, which is scheduled to leave the UK with an aircraft before the withdrawal date, but arrives at an EU27 airport as of that date.  4.
ARIFF QUOTAS 4.1 First come-first served tariff quotas
equests by operators to benefit from Union tariff quotas according to the UCC which are based on declarations that have been accepted prior to the withdrawal date are eligible where the required supporting documents have been provided to the UK customs authorities prior to that date. Declarations accepted by the UK customs authorities as of the withdrawal date are not eligible to benefit from Union tariff quotas. Where the UK customs authorities have transmitted valid requests to the Commission without delay, the Commission will allocate quantities according to Article 51(2) UCC IA13 and will communicate the amounts allocated to the UK thereafter. 4.2 Tariff quotas managed by licences For licence-managed Union tariff quotas, the rights and obligations that arise from UK agricultural licences allocated by the licensing issuing authorities of the UK as well as those that were transferred to operators established in the UK will cease to be valid in the EU27 as of the withdrawal date. As of that date, EU27 customs administrations shall not any longer accept those licences.  Licences issued by EU27 licensing authorities will remain valid within the EU27, unless transferred to operators established in the UK. 5.
REFERENTIAL ORIGIN14 ASPECTS As of the withdrawal date the UK becomes a third country to which the EU preferential trade arrangements with third countries cease to apply.                                                            13
Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2015/2447
f 24 November 2015 laying down detailed rules for implementing certain provisions of Regulation (EU) No 952/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council laying down the Union Customs Code (OJ L 343, 29.12.2015, p. 558). 14
References to "originating" or "non-originating" in this section should be considered only in relation to preferential origin

5.1 Consideration of the preferential origin a) UK inputs As from the withdrawal date UK inputs (material or processing operations) are considered as 'non-originating' under preferential trade arrangements for the determination of the preferential origin of goods incorporating those inputs, in accordance with the Notice to stakeholders
Withdrawal of the United Kingdom and EU rules in the field of customs and external trade: Preferential origin of goods15   b) EU imports from the UK  Goods imported into the EU from the UK as of the withdrawal date will become non-originating goods for the purposes of their use under EU preferential arrangements. This means that:    i. Goods produced in the UK before the withdrawal date, if imported into the EU as of the withdrawal date, are not considered as EU originating for the purposes of their direct exportation, or exportation after further processing, to an EU preferential partner country. ii. Goods produced in the EU27 before the withdrawal date, if imported from the UK as of the withdrawal date
are not considered as EU originating for the purposes of their direct exportation, or exportation after further processing, to an EU preferential partner country. iii. Goods originating in preferential partner countries and imported into the UK before the withdrawal date in accordance with the preferences provided by EU trade preferential arrangements, if imported into the EU after withdrawal
are not considered as originating in the corresponding partner country. These goods can therefore not be used for cumulation purposes with that partner country (bilateral cumulation) or with other partner countries (diagonal cumulation) under the EU preferential arrangements.  c) EU exports to, and imports from, preferential partner countries via the UK  Goods imported as of the withdrawal date from the EU27 via the UK into a third country with which the EU has a preferential arrangement may be entitled for preferential treatment in that third partner country, provided that the provisions on direct transport/non-manipulation contained in the origin provisions of the relevant EU preferential arrangements are respected.  Similarly, goods imported as of the withdrawal date from EU partner countries into the EU via the UK may be entitled for preferential treatment in the EU provided that the provisions on direct transport/non-manipulation contained in the origin provisions of the relevant EU preferential arrangements are respected.                                                            15 https://ec.europa.eu/taxation_customs/sites/taxation/files/notice-to-stakeholders-brexit-preferential-origin-final_en.pdf
8
d) UK Overseas Countries and Territories  Materials originating and work or processing carried out in the UK Overseas Countries and Territories (Annex II TFEU), are not considered as originating when determining the origin of goods imported into the EU from other OCTs or from EU partner countries as from the withdrawal date. 5.2 Proofs of origin a) General principle:  In principle, proofs of origin can be issued or made out only if the products comply, at the time where the proofs are issued or made out, with the origin rules established in the relevant preferential trade agreement or arrangement. As of the withdrawal date, UK content will be considered as non-originating for the purposes of issuing or making out proofs of origin. Supporting documents (including proofs of origin and suppliers' declarations) can be relied upon for the issuance of proofs of origin on the condition that they do not concern UK content which is determinant for the acquisition of origin. Exporters and competent customs or other competent authorities issuing or making out such proofs of origin as of the withdrawal date are required to ascertain whether the supporting documents meet the conditions at the time of issuance of the proof.  b) Proofs of origin issued in the EU The following proofs of origin issued or made out before the withdrawal date in the EU remain valid, when the export of the consignment has been effected or ensured before the withdrawal date.
Proofs of origin issued or made out in the UK before the withdrawal date;
Proofs of origin issued or made out in the EU27 before the withdrawal date in relation to goods with a UK content;
Certificates of origin issued by EU27 customs authorities for UK exporters; Invoice declarations, origin declarations or statements on origin made out by UK exporters for the exportation of the EU originating products from the EU27 before the withdrawal date. The validity is limited to the period established under the relevant EU trade preferential arrangements, for the purpose of being used at importation in the partner country in accordance with the relevant provisions of the EU preferential arrangements. However, EU preferential partner countries may question such proofs of origin and request verification when they accompany goods imported in the preferential partner countries as of the withdrawal date. In these cases, the EU27 Member State customs authorities will reply, to verification requests, in accordance with the possibilities available to them to confirm the originating status of the goods or the authenticity of those proofs. For those purposes, the EU origin shall be determined as of the time
when the proofs were issued, in light of the principle described in the first paragraph above. c) Proofs of origin issued in the EU preferential partner countries Proofs of origin issued or made out in EU preferential partner countries before the withdrawal date in relation to goods with UK content which was determinant for the acquisition of the partner country origin, may be used for importation purposes in the EU during the period of its validity as provided under the relevant EU trade preferential arrangements, when the export of the consignment has been effected or ensured before the withdrawal date. However, UK content incorporated in goods with EU origin imported in the EU preferential partner countries and accompanied by a valid EU proof of origin may not be used in the EU preferential partner countries for cumulation purposes as of the withdrawal date.  5.3 Supplier's declarations for preferential trade purposes  Supplier's declarations are supporting documents on which basis proofs of origin can be issued. As of the withdrawal date, they can be relied upon for the issuance of proofs of origin on the condition that they do not include UK content which is determinant for the acquisition of origin. Exporters and competent customs or other competent authorities issuing or making out such proofs of origin as of the withdrawal date are required to ascertain whether supplier's declarations meet the conditions at the time of issuance of the proof. As of the withdrawal date:  Supplier's declarations made out by UK suppliers before the withdrawal date may not be used for the purposes of issuing or making out proofs of origin in EU27 Member States as of the withdrawal date.  Suppliers in EU27 Member States providing the exporter or the trader with the information necessary to determine the preferential origin status of goods through the originating status of the goods supplied before that date and for which they   In the case of long- the suppliers established in the EU27 should inform the exporter or trader if the long-term supplier's declaration is not valid any longer as of that date for all or some consignments covered by the long- 5.4 Exporters under preferential trade As of the withdrawal date, the following aspects should be considered: a) With respect to approved exporters for the purposes of making out invoice declarations or origin declarations in accordance with the relevant provisions on preferential origin of the Union:
10
Authorisations granted by UK customs authorities to exporters and re-consignors to be approved exporters are no longer valid in the EU27 as of the withdrawal date.   Authorisations granted by EU27 customs authorities to exporters and re-consignors established in the UK are no longer valid in the EU27 as of the withdrawal date
Authorisations granted by EU27 customs authorities to exporters and re-consignors established in the EU27 with a UK EORI number are no longer valid in the EU27 as of the withdrawal date
EU approved exporters and re-consignors established in the EU27 should inform the concerned national customs authority regarding changes on the fulfilment of the conditions subject to which they were authorised, considering that UK content will be non-originating as of the withdrawal date. Accordingly, EU27 customs authorities which authorised those exporters and re-consignors as approved exporters will amend or withdraw the authorisation as appropriate. b) With respect to registered exporters (REX) for the purposes of making out invoice declarations or origin declarations in accordance with the relevant provisions on preferential origin of the Union:  Registration by UK customs authorities of exporters and re-consignors in REX are no longer valid in the EU27 as of the withdrawal date.   Registrations by EU27 customs authorities to exporters and re-consignors established in the UK are no longer valid in the EU27 as of the withdrawal date.  Registrations by EU27 customs authorities to exporters and re-consignors established in the EU27 with a UK EORI number are no longer valid in the EU27 as of the withdrawal date
EU registered exporters and re-consignors established in the EU27 should inform immediately the concerned national customs authority on any relevant change relating to information they provided for the purposes of their registration. Accordingly, EU27 customs authorities which have registered those exporters and re-consignors will revoke the registration if the conditions for being registered are no longer met. 5.5 Origin quota derogations established in certain EU FTAs  Since origin quota derogations are covered by Article 56(4) UCC, the same rules as those for tariff quotas in Section 4.1 will apply.  6.
ALUATION As of the withdrawal date, for the goods produced in the UK using assists16 and imported into the EU27 after that date, the value of those assists will have to be added                                                            16
Goods and services referred to in Article 71
)(b) UCC.
11
to the customs value of the goods, in accordance with the conditions17 specified in Article 71(1)(b) UCC and Article 135 UCC IA. 7.
NTRY OF GOODS INTO THE CUSTOMS TERRITORY OF THE UNION 7.1 Entry summary declaration (ENS) Goods brought from the UK into the customs territory of the Union as of the withdrawal date shall be covered by an entry summary declaration (ENS), where required, which has to be lodged within the time-limits set out in the UCC DA18. That covers also the goods moving between two points in the customs territory of the Union via the UK.
transit declaration comprising all security and safety data may be used to comply with ENS requirements and subject to time-limits being respected, e.g. where common transit is used
Where an ENS was lodged at the customs office of first entry in the UK before the withdrawal date, it will not remain valid for subsequent ports or airports in the EU27 where the goods are arriving as of that date. The economic operator shall lodge a new ENS covering all goods arriving in the EU27. Where in those cases the operator could not comply with the respective time-limits, the ENS lodgement should be accepted. Where an ENS was lodged at the customs office of first entry in the EU27 before the withdrawal date, with subsequent ports located in the UK and in the EU27, and where the vessel after calling at a UK port arrives in a subsequent EU27 port as of the withdrawal date, an ENS for all goods on the vessel shall be lodged. The same applies in case of diversions. Goods covered by an ENS, which had been lodged before the withdrawal date with a customs office in the UK, were diverted and arrive in the EU27 instead as of the withdrawal date. In such case, the previous ENS will be deleted by the system and deemed not having been lodged after 200 days and the economic operator has to lodge a new ENS for the goods then brought to the EU27.  In the specific cases where goods leave the UK directly for the EU27 before the withdrawal date and arrive in the customs territory of the Union as of that date, no ENS is required.  7.2 Temporary storage of goods (TS) Authorisations for the operation of temporary storage facilities granted by the UK customs authorities will cease to be valid in the EU27 as of the withdrawal date. Authorisations granted by the EU27 customs authorities including the possibility to move goods to a temporary facility in the UK will have to be amended to exclude such possibility as of the withdrawal date.                                                             17
The value of assists, apportioned as appropriate, has to be added to the price when they are supplied directly or indirectly by the buyer/importer for use in connection with the production and sale for export of the imported goods, to the extent that their value has not been included in the price actually paid or payable. 18
Article 105 UCC DA, as amended by Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2019/334 of 19 December 2018, OJ L 60, 28.2.2019, p.
.
12
Where goods in TS covered by an authorisation for the operation of TS facilities granted by the UK customs authorities will be moving between a temporary storage facility in the UK and another one in the EU27 and will arrive at the EU27 border as of the withdrawal date, those goods will be treated as non-Union goods brought to the customs territory of the Union from a third country. Where those goods arrive in the EU27 already before the withdrawal date, but their movement to an EU27 TS facility is intended to continue as of that date, that movement will not be covered by a valid authorisation. Therefore, temporary storage for those goods should end before the withdrawal date (e.g. by placing the goods under a customs procedure or re-exporting them). If such regularisation does not take place, there will be a non-compliance of the obligations laid down in the customs legislation concerning the introduction of non-Union goods into the customs territory of the Union and therefore Article 79 UCC will apply, i.e. a customs debt due to non-compliance will incur. In the case of goods in TS covered by an authorisation granted by the EU27 customs authorities and located in the UK as of the withdrawal date, such goods will be deemed to have been re-exported. 7.3 Customs status of goods As a general rule, for Union goods which are moving as intra
nion movement from the UK around the withdrawal date, their treatment will depend on when they enter the customs territory of the Union: where they enter the EU27 before the withdrawal date, they will keep their customs status of Union goods; where they arrive at the EU27 external border as of the withdrawal date, they will be treated as any other third-country goods.  For Union goods moving between two points in the customs territory of the Union via the UK, where the movement starts as an intra-Union movement, a proof of Union status shall be accepted where those goods re-enter the customs territory of the Union only as of the withdrawal date after having crossed the UK. Besides that, any formalities required for goods re-entering the customs territory of the Union will be required, e.g. ENS. Where Union goods are carried by air and have been loaded or transhipped at a UK airport for consignment to an EU27 airport and are carried under a single transport document (STD) according to Article 119(2)(a) UCC DA issued in the UK and that movement actually leaves the UK airport before the withdrawal date and arrive
at an EU27 airport on the withdrawal date, those goods will keep their Union status
This will be practically relevant only for aircraft leaving from a UK airport in the late hours before 00:00 CET on the withdrawal date on a direct flight to an EU27 airport and arriving there after 00:00 CET on the withdrawal date
Where Union goods are carried by sea on a vessel assigned to a regular shipping service and the vessel called within an ongoing voyage at a UK port and left that UK port actually before the withdrawal date and arrived directly  at an EU27 port as of the withdrawal date, i.e. without calling at any other port in a territory outside the customs territory of the Union or at any free zone in a Union port, and has not made any transhipments of goods at sea, those goods will keep their Union status. Where Union goods are carried by sea on a non-regular shipping service vessel and that vessel leaves a UK port actually before the withdrawal date for an EU27 port and  13
arrives at that port as of the withdrawal date, a proof of the customs status of Union goods shall be accepted.  Where motorised road vehicles registered in an EU27 Member State are returning from the UK and re-enter the customs territory of the Union, Article 208 UCC IA applies. To goods in baggage carried by a passenger arriving from the UK Article 210 UCC IA applies. Where packaging with Union status is returning from the UK as of the withdrawal date, its Union status shall be considered as proven in accordance with the rules set out in Article 209 UCC IA. 7.4
elief from import duty Returned goods Where Union goods were temporarily exported from the UK before the withdrawal and are re-imported in the EU27 as of the withdrawal date complying with the conditions established in Article 203 UCC, those goods shall be considered returned goods and hence be imported with total relief.  Where Union goods are brought from the EU27 to the UK before the withdrawal date and where then such goods move back to the EU27 as of the withdrawal date, the provisions on returned goods referred to in Article 203 UCC should apply if the economic operator can provide evidence that the Union goods:  were transported to the UK prior to the withdrawal date; and   return in an unaltered state in accordance with Article 203(5) UCC and Article 158 UCC DA.  The withdrawal of the UK as such, however, may not be used as special circumstances in order to exceed the three-year period referred to in Article 203(1) UCC. The proof that the Union goods were brought to the UK prior to the withdrawal date should be provided in particular by the respective transport documents and, if necessary, accompanied by other relevant documents (e.g. a lease contract). Where applicable, a proof may be required that the state of the goods has not been altered.  Duty Relief Regulation Concerning the duty relief for personal property belonging to natural persons transferring their normal place of residence from a third country to the Union, Article 5 of the Duty Relief Regulation19 foresees a continuous period of at least twelve months at a normal place of residence outside the customs territory of the Union for duty-free treatment.  For that personal property as well as for other categories of goods covered by the Duty Relief Regulation, e.g. goods imported on the occasion of a marriage set out in Article 12 Duty Relief Regulation, the requested periods, e.g. the period of residence,                                                            19
Council Regulation (EC) No 1186/2009 of 16 November 2009 setting up a Community system of reliefs from customs duty, OJ L 324, 10.12.2009, p. 23
14
may include also the period of application of that Regulation. 8.
PECIAL PROCEDURES 8.1 Transit Union/common transit procedures As of the withdrawal date, the UK accedes to the Convention on a common transit procedure20 (CTC) in its own right, hence it may use common transit and continue to have access to the New Computerised Transit System (NCTS
as a Contracting Party to the CTC. Consequently, the transit operations ongoing at the time of the withdrawal shall continue in the NCTS.  Situations where goods were released for a transit procedure in the EU27 or in a common transit country or in the UK and are moving to, from or via the UK:  a) Goods moving under a transit operation from a customs office of departure in the EU27 or in a common transit country to a customs office of destination in the UK
Where goods are placed under a Union transit procedure in the EU27 or under a common transit procedure in a common transit country with destination in the UK and those goods are still located in the EU27 as of the withdrawal date, that Union transit procedure will continue as a common transit procedure in the UK
The customs office of entry in the UK will play the role of a customs office of transit, i.e. it shall request the relevant data from the customs office of departure and fulfil all tasks of a customs office of transit. At the external EU27 border an exit summary declaration (EXS
has to be lodged
or security and safety purposes, unless the particulars necessary for risk analysis for security and safety purposes have already been provided with the transit declaration or the obligation to lodge a pre-departure declaration is waived under the UCC.  Where the goods are already located in the UK as of the withdrawal date, the transit movement will continue to the customs office of destination. b) Goods moving under a transit operation from a customs office of departure in the UK to a customs office of destination in the EU27 or in a common transit country  Where goods are placed under a Union transit procedure in the UK with destination in the EU27 or in a common transit country and the goods are still located in the UK as of the withdrawal date, that Union transit procedure will continue as a common transit procedure to the destination in the EU27 or in the common transit country
The customs office of entry in the EU27 will play the role of a customs office of transit, i.e., it shall request the relevant data from the customs office of departure and fulfil all tasks of a customs office of transit. At the external EU27 border an ENS has to be                                                            20
OJ L 226, 13.8.1987, p. 2, as last amended by Decision 1/2017, OJ L 8, 12.1.2018, p 1.
15
lodged for security and safety purposes, unless the particulars necessary for the ENS have already been provided with the transit declaration or the obligation to lodge an ENS is waived under the UCC.  Where the goods are already located in the EU27 as of the withdrawal date, that transit procedure continues to the destination in the EU27 or in the common transit country
c) Goods moving under a transit operation via the UK
Where goods move between a customs office of departure in an EU27 Member State or in a common transit country via the UK to a customs office of destination in an EU27 Member State or in a common transit country and those goods are still located in the EU2
or in a common transit country as of the withdrawal date, that transit procedure will continue as a common transit procedure in the UK
The customs office of entry in the UK and the customs office of entry in the respective Member State where the movement re-enters the customs territory of the Union, respectively, will play the role of customs offices of transit. They shall request the relevant data from the customs office of departure and fulfil all tasks of a customs office of transit. When leaving the EU27 territory (before entering to the UK) an EXS has to be lodged, unless the particulars necessary for risk analysis for security and safety purposes have already been provided with the transit declaration or the obligation to lodge a pre-departure declaration is waived under the UCC.  Where the goods have crossed the UK and re-entered the customs territory of the EU27 or of a common transit country before the withdrawal date, that transit operation will continue until its destination.  Where the goods covered by a transit declaration are crossing the UK at the time of the withdrawal or have crossed and left the UK, but have not yet re-entered the customs territory of the EU27 by the time of the withdrawal, the customs office of entry into the EU27 will act as a customs office of transit. It shall request the relevant data from the customs office of departure and fulfil all tasks of a customs office of transit. At the external EU27 border an ENS has to be lodged, unless the particulars necessary for the ENS have already been provided with the transit declaration or the obligation to lodge an ENS is waived under the UCC
Customs authorities may, for a period up to one year after UK accession to the CTC, continue to accept existing forms of the guarant undertaking
and guarantee certificates21 subject to the necessary geographical adaptations made manually and approved authorities themselves (in case of guarantee certificates). By the end of that period, the holder of that procedure must provide a new undertaking according to the modified model. Where an enquiry or recovery procedure was started, but not ended at the time of withdrawal, it is continued in the NCTS.                                                            21
Annexes 32-01, 32-02 and 32-03 and Chapters VI and VII in Part II of Annex 72-04 to the UCC IA.
16
Electronic transport document (ETD) used as a transit declaration for goods carried by air or sea Where goods are placed under an ETD transit procedure in the EU27 or in a common transit country with destination in the UK and the goods do not arrive in the UK before the withdrawal date that procedure will continue as an ETD common transit procedure to the UK airport of arrival as of that date.
Where goods are placed under an ETD transit procedure in the UK with destination in the EU27 or in a common transit country and the goods do not arrive in the EU27 or in the common transit country before the withdrawal date that procedure will continue to the airport in the EU27 or in a common transit country as of that date. Where goods are carried by sea under an ETD transit procedure between the UK and the EU27 and the regular shipping service vessel ha
left the UK port before the withdrawal date and arrived directly at an EU27 port as of the withdrawal date
i.e. without calling at any other port in a territory outside the customs territory of the Union or at any free zone in a Union port, and has not made any transhipments of goods at sea, the transit procedure will continue to its EU27 destination
Movement of goods under the TIR operations The UK (as all other Member States) is already today a Contracting Party to the TIR Convention22 will no longer be part of the customs territory of the Union, border formalities will apply to TIR operations. Although the UK will have access to the NCTS as a Contracting Party to the CTC, that access does not cover the use of the NCTS for TIR operations. a) Goods moving under a TIR operation from a customs office of departure/entry in the EU27 to a customs office of destination/exit in the UK Where goods are placed under a TIR procedure in the EU27 with destination/exit in the UK and those goods are still located in the EU27 as of the withdrawal date, that TIR procedure will, at the latest, be terminated for the Union territory at the customs office of the physical exit from the EU27. That office will become the customs office of destination/exit. It shall request the relevant data from the customs office of departure and fulfil all tasks of a customs office of destination/exit23. For the exit of the goods at the external border of the EU27, an EXS is to be lodged, unless the particulars necessary for risk analysis for security and safety purposes have already been provided or the obligation to lodge a pre-departure declaration is waived under the UCC.  Where the goods are already located in the UK or have left but not yet arrived in the UK as of the withdrawal date, the TIR movement will be subject to UK customs law and to the TIR Convention. However, the UK customs office of destination/exit will                                                            22
Customs Convention on the International Transport of Goods under cover of TIR carnets done at Geneva on 14 November 1975, OJ L 252, 14.9.1978, p. 2. 23
In particular the tasks stipulated by Articles 278 and 279 UCC IA.
17
not be able to send any NCTS TIR messages to the customs office of departure/entry located in the EU27 and thus this office will not be able to discharge those TIR operations in the NCTS with the usual electronic messages. Therefore, the holders of the procedure will have to provide an alternative proof of terminating the TIR procedure, and the customs office will have to terminate and discharge the operation manually.  b) Goods moving under a TIR operation from a customs office of departure/entry in the UK to a customs office of destination/exit in the EU27  Where goods are placed under a TIR procedure in the UK with destination in the EU27 and the goods are still located in the UK as of the withdrawal date, that TIR movement cannot continue until the destination in the EU27. When the goods arrive at a customs office at the external EU27 border, the operation will be treated as any TIR operation coming from a third country and formalities established for those goods will apply24. An ENS has to be lodged at entry into the EU27 at the UK/EU27 border, unless the particulars necessary for the ENS have already been provided or the obligation to lodge an ENS is waived under the UCC. In the NCTS, the transit procedure started in the UK cannot be closed with the usual IE messages, the UK will have to write it off manually. A new NCTS TIR movement has to be lodged by the operator with the customs office at the external EU27 border which will act as a custom
office of departure/entry for the TIR operation within the EU.  Where goods are placed under a TIR procedure in the UK with destination in the EU27 and the goods are already located in the EU27 as of the withdrawal date, that TIR movement can continue until the destination in the EU27. When the goods arrive at a customs office of destination/exit, the operation will be treated as any other TIR operation. c) Goods moving under a TIR operation via the UK
Where goods move between a customs office of departure/entry in an EU27 Member State via the UK to a customs office of destination/exit in an EU27 Member and those goods are still located in the EU27, before crossing the UK, the following applies: as of the withdrawal date, that TIR procedure shall, at the latest, be terminated at the customs office of exit from the EU27. This office then becomes the customs office of destination/exit. The "new
customs offices of destination/exit will request the relevant data from the customs office of departure and fulfil all tasks of a customs office of destination/exit. For the exit of the goods at the external border of the EU27, an EXS is to be lodged, unless the particulars necessary for risk analysis for security and safety purposes have already been provided or the obligation to lodge a pre-departure declaration is waived under the UCC. Where the goods have crossed the UK and re-entered the customs territory of the EU27 before the withdrawal date the TIR movement can continue until destination.                                                            24
TIR Handbook Section 1.2, Articles 273, 275 and 276 UCC IA, Article 184 UCC DA, Annex 10 (4) TIR Convention,  Article 19 and Annex 2 TIR Convention.
18
Where the goods covered by a TIR Carnet are crossing the UK by the time of the withdrawal, the following applies: the goods arriving at the EU27 external border will have to be treated as any other TIR movement coming from a third country and formalities established for those goods will apply. An ENS has to be lodged before entering the customs territory of the EU27 again at the UK/EU27 border unless the particulars necessary for the ENS have already been provided or the obligation to lodge an ENS is waived under the UCC. However, in the NCTS, the TIR procedure started in the EU27 Member State could continue. 8.2 Special procedures other than transit Customs warehousing (CW) UK authorisations for customs warehousing are no longer valid in the EU27 as of the withdrawal date, including those which allow for the movement of goods between different customs warehouses. The same will apply to authorisations for movements of goods from customs warehousing facilities located in the EU27 to customs warehousing facilities locate
in the UK included in customs warehousing authorisations  granted by the EU27 customs authorities (see Article 179(3) UCC DA).  Where goods stored in a UK customs warehouse are brought to the EU27 as of the withdrawal date, they have to fulfil the customs formalities established in the UCC for non-Union goods entering the customs territory of the Union from outside this territory (i.e. ENS, temporary storage declaration and customs declaration).
here goods will be moving between a customs warehouse in the UK and another one in the EU27 and arrive in the EU27 within a short period before the withdrawal date without sufficient time to reach the destination, and their movement continues in the EU27
as of that date those goods are not covered by an authorisation valid in the EU27. Therefore, the concerned economic operator should discharge this procedure before the withdrawal date (e.g. by placing the goods under a subsequent customs procedure). Such subsequent procedure may be CW as well, provided that the goods are covered by a valid authorisation granted by the EU27 customs authorities. If such regularisation does not take place, the concerned goods would not comply with the obligations laid down in the customs legislation concerning the storage of such goods within the customs territory of the Union and therefore Article 79 UCC will apply, i.e. a customs debt due to non-compliance will incur
If goods placed under CW located in the EU27 are brought to the UK before the withdrawal date (i.e. because the movement was authorised by the customs authorities) and such goods are located in the UK as of the withdrawal date, the CW procedure will be deemed to have been discharged (i.e. the goods would be considered to be taken out of the customs territory of the Union). The economic operator concerned should provide a proof, if requested by the customs authorities, showing that the goods were brought to the UK before the withdrawal date (e.g. a transport document).
Free zones  Where goods placed under a free zone procedure in the UK are brought to the EU27 as of the withdrawal date, they have to fulfil the customs formalities established in the  19
UCC for non-Union goods entering the customs territory of the Union from outside this territory (i.e. ENS, temporary storage declaration and customs declaration)
Temporary admission (TA) Any authorisations granted by the UK customs authorities to place goods under TA before the withdrawal date will not be valid in the EU27 as of that date. The procedure for goods moved under those authorisations according to Article 219 UCC to the EU27 and located in the EU27 as of the withdrawal date should be discharged before that date, so the goods have to be a) re-exported, b) placed under a subsequent customs procedure, c) destroyed with no waste remaining, or d) abandoned to the State. Such subsequent procedure may be TA as well, provided that the goods are covered by a valid authorisation granted by the EU27 customs authorities. If such discharge does not take place, the concerned goods would not comply with the obligations laid down in the customs legislation concerning the TA of such goods within the customs territory of the Union and therefore Article 79 UCC will apply, i.e. a customs debt due to non-compliance will incur. Where goods placed under temporary admission (TA) covered by an authorisation granted by the EU27 before the withdrawal date are located in the UK customs territory as of that date, and are brought from the UK to the EU27, they have to comply with the customs formalities established in the UCC for goods entering the customs territory of the Union from outside this territory (i.e. ENS, temporary storage declaration and customs declaration).  Where goods placed under TA in the EU27 are moved to the UK before the withdrawal date and such goods are located in the UK as of the withdrawal date, the TA procedure will be deemed to have been discharged (i.e. the goods would be considered to be taken out of the customs territory of the Union). The economic operator concerned should provide a proof, if requested by the customs authorities, showing that the goods were brought to the UK before the withdrawal date (e.g. a transport document).
End-use (E-U) Any authorisations granted by the UK customs authorities to place goods under E-U before the withdrawal date will not be valid in the EU27 as of that date. The procedure for goods covered by those authorisations and located in the EU27 as of the withdrawal date should be discharged before that date, so the goods have to be a) taken out of the customs territory of the Union, b) used for the purposes laid down for the application of the duty exemption or reduced rate of duty, c) destroyed with or without waste remaining, or d) abandoned to the State. The same applies in the case of authorisations for Transfer of Rights and Obligations (TORO) and for movement of goods as established in Articles 218 and 219 UCC. If the discharge mentioned above does not take place, the concerned goods would not comply with the obligations laid down in the customs legislation concerning the E-U of such goods within the customs territory of the Union and therefore Article 79 UCC will apply, i.e. a customs debt due to non-compliance will incur. Where goods placed under end-use (E-U) before the withdrawal date are located in the UK customs territory as of that date, and move therefrom to the EU27, they have to  20
comply with customs formalities applicable to any other third-country goods (i.e. ENS, temporary storage declaration and customs declaration).  Where goods placed under E-U in the EU27 are moved to the UK before the withdrawal date, and such goods are located in the UK as of the withdrawal date, the
U procedure will be deemed to have been discharged (i.e. the goods would be considered to be taken out of the customs territory of the Union). The economic operator concerned should provide a proof, if requested by the customs authorities, showing that the goods were brought to the UK before the withdrawal date (e.g. a transport document).
Inward processing (IP) Any authorisations granted by the UK customs authorities to place goods under IP before the withdrawal date will not be valid in the EU27 as of that date. The procedure for goods moved under those authorisations according to Article 219 UCC to the EU27 and located in the EU27 as of the withdrawal date should be discharged before that date, so the goods have to be a) re-exported, b) placed under a subsequent customs procedure, c) destroyed with no waste remaining, or d) abandoned to the State. Such subsequent procedure may be IP as well, provided that the goods are covered by a valid authorisation granted by the EU27 customs authorities. If such discharge does not take place, the concerned goods would not comply with the obligations laid down in the customs legislation concerning the processing of such goods within the customs territory of the Union and therefore Article 79 UCC will apply, i.e. a customs debt due to non-compliance will incur. Where goods placed under inward processing (IP) before the withdrawal date are located in the UK customs territory as of that date, and are brought from the UK to the EU27, they have to comply with the customs formalities established in the UCC for goods entering the customs territory of the Union from outside this territory (i.e. ENS, temporary storage declaration and customs declaration)
In case of an IP EX/IM authorisation granted by UK customs authorities, if equivalent goods are exported before the withdrawal date, the equivalent amount of goods (raw material) should be brought to the customs territory of the Union with total relief from import duty before the withdrawal date. Otherwise, if the equivalent goods were brought to the customs territory of the Union as of the withdrawal date, they would be treated as third country goods entering the EU territory and the relevant import duties would apply. Where goods placed under IP in the EU27 are moved to the UK before the withdrawal date, and such goods are located in the UK a
of the withdrawal date, the IP procedure will be deemed to have been discharged (i.e. the goods would be considered to be taken out of the customs territory of the Union). The economic operator concerned should provide a proof
if requested by the customs authorities
showing that the goods were brought to the UK before the withdrawal date (e.g. a transport document).  Outward processing (OP) Any authorisations granted by the UK customs authorities to place goods under OP before the withdrawal date will not be valid in the EU27 as of that date. If the  21
processed products resulting from goods placed under OP (authorisation granted by UK authorities) were not brought to the UK, but to the EU27, as of the withdrawal date, such processed products must comply with the customs formalities established in the UCC for non-Union goods brought to the customs territory of the Union. Such products cannot benefit from OP (i.e. the calculation of import duty cannot be done according to Article 86(5) UCC). In case of an OP IM/EX authorisation granted by UK customs authorities, if equivalent goods are brought to the customs territory of the Union before the withdrawal date, the equivalent amount of goods (raw material) should be exported within the time limit of the authorisation. If such export does not take place, this would entail a non-compliance with the obligations laid down in the customs legislation concerning the OP procedure and therefore Article 79 UCC will apply, i.e. a customs debt due to non-compliance will incur
9.
OODS TAKEN OUT OF THE CUSTOMS TERRITORY OF THE UNION  9.1 Pre-departure declaration According to Article 263(3) UCC, the pre-departure declaration takes the form of either (i) a customs declaration for goods to be taken out of the customs territory of the Union; (ii) a re-export declaration; or (iii) an EXS. In most cases, the pre-departure declaration will be provided in the form of a customs declaration.  Where a pre-departure declaration was lodged and, where applicable, goods were released in the UK before the withdrawal date, that declaration will not be valid where those goods enter the EU27 as of the withdrawal date to exit via the EU27 and a new pre-departure declaration will be required for those goods in the form of a re-export declaration or of an EXS, which has to be lodged within the time-limits set out in the UCC DA.25 9.2 Export and re-export Where Union goods are to be brought from the EU27 to the UK and the economic operator has no knowledge whether the goods are taken out of the EU27 before the withdrawal date, those goods may only be placed under the export procedure at any designated customs office in the EU27 as of the withdrawal date. a) Export from the EU27 crossing the UK or with a customs office of exit in the UK  Where goods were released for export from the EU27 before the withdrawal date and are carried to the customs office of exit in the UK or cross the UK on their way to a customs office of exit in another EU27 Member State, there are the following possible scenarios:  i. Where the goods on their way to the UK customs office of exit are still located in the EU27 as of the withdrawal date, the previously foreseen customs office                                                            25
Article 244 UCC DA, as amended by Commission Delegated Regulation XXX (EU) 2019/334 of 19 December 2018, OJ L 60, 28.2.2019, p. 1.
22
of exit need
to be replaced by a customs office of exit located at the EU27 border (the diversion of the export movement is executed in ECS). This customs office will confirm the physical exit of the goods and send the respective message to the customs office of export. The same applies to goods on their way to an EU27 customs office of exit which are before crossing the UK still in the customs territory of the Union. ii. Where the goods on their way to the UK customs office of exit are already located in the UK as of the withdrawal date, the UK will not be able to send any messages via ECS confirming the physical exit of the goods. The customs office of export located in the EU27 will have to close the movement in ECS based on an alternative proof. Economic operators need to provide alternative proofs to the customs office of export in order to close the movement. iii. Where the goods already have crossed the UK on their way to a customs office of exit located in another Member State, there will be no impact on the current procedure (i.e. the customs office of exit at the external EU27 border will still confirm the physical exit of the goods to the customs office of export).  b) Export from the UK with a customs office of exit located in the EU27 iv. Where goods released for export from the UK with
customs office of exit in the EU27 are still located in the UK as of the withdrawal date, they will be subject to UK customs procedures when exiting the UK. When those goods enter the customs territory of the Union as of the withdrawal date, they will be treated as any other third country goods, i.e. an ENS shall be lodged at the first entry point of the EU27, the goods will have to be placed in temporary storage and, to reach the customs office of exit, they can be placed under external transit procedure. When the goods have reached the EU27 customs office of exit, then a re-export notification, a re-export declaration or an EXS at the EU27 customs office of exit should be lodged.  v. Where goods released for export in the UK via an EU27 customs office of exit are already located in the EU27 as of the withdrawal date and reach the envisaged EU27 customs office of exit, that customs office will not be able to confirm the physical exit of the goods to the UK customs office of export, as the UK will be disconnected from the ECS as of the withdrawal date. The customs office of exit should, upon request from the economic operator, issue a proof of exit (e.g. in the form of endorsement of the EAD).  10.
USTOMS CONTROLS ON IPR, SAFETY
HEALTH AND THE ENVIRONMENT Safety, health and environment EU legislation requires goods imported in the EU, in transit or exported outside the EU to comply with a number of safety, health and environmental rules. It is the role of customs to check if goods entering or leaving the EU comply with all those rules. As of the withdrawal date, the goods brought to the customs territory of the Union from the UK or taken out from the customs territory of the Union to the UK will be subject to those rules.  The controls on the compliance with those rules can include documentary checks on import/export licences for certain goods as well as physical checks on the goods and  23
involves close cooperation and coordination with competent authorities who are responsible for the correct application of the relevant legislative requirements. It is important to emphasise that customs will only release the goods once the relevant competent authority has fully completed their controls and this has been communicated to customs via the established procedures (e.g. authorisations, licences, electronic data communication system between customs and competent authority, etc.). Import / export licences for certain goods Economic operators engaged in shipments of goods which are subject to import/export licences or which may become subject to import/export licences as of the withdrawal date are reminded of the legal repercussions which need to be considered when the UK becomes a third country. They should confirm that their goods meet all licencing obligations in order to prepare for possible changes as a result of no deal.  Further details on the consequences of withdrawal in the field of import / export licences for certain goods can be found in the "Notice to Stakeholders on the Withdrawal of the UK and EU rules in the field of import / export licences for certain goods
published on 25 January 201826 and in sectorial preparedness notices, such as the "Notice to stakeholders  withdrawal of the United Kingdom and EU waste law"27
the "Notice to stakeholders  withdrawal of the United Kingdom and EU rules in the field of export and import of hazardous chemicals"28, and the "Notice to stakeholders  withdrawal of the United Kingdom and EU rules on trade in protected species of wild fauna and flora"29. All preparedness notices are available, in all official languages of the EU, on the "Brexit preparedness website"30 of the Commission. On 19 December 2018, the Commission adopted a proposal for a Regulation31 that would add the UK to the list of third countries covered by the EU General Authorisation 001 that lifts the requirements for individual licenses when trading in dual-use items. Intellectual Property Rights For the enforcement of IPR, as of the withdrawal date the EU rules on customs enforcement of intellectual property rights, and in particular Regulation (EU) No 608/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 June 2013 concerning customs enforcement of intellectual property rights, no longer apply to the UK. Further details on the consequences of withdrawal in particular on the submission and validity of Union applications for action can be found in the "Notice to Stakeholders                                                             26
http://trade.ec.europa.eu/doclib/docs/2018/january/tradoc_156568.pdf
27
https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/file_import/waste_law_en_0.pdf 28
[to be added  will be finalised shortly] 29
https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/file_import/trade_in_protected_species_en.pdf
30
https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness/preparedness-notices_en
31
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?qid=1550165775514&uri=CELEX:52018PC0891
24
Withdrawal of the UK and EU rules in the field of customs enforcement of intellectual property rights
32 Drug Precursors With regard to EU legislation laying down rules for the monitoring of trade between the EU and third countries, Council Regulation (EC) 111/2005 in drug precursors33, certain operators will need to have obtain a licence/registration and for certain transactions import/export authorisations will be needed when trading with the UK.
European Commission Directorate-General Taxation and Customs Union                                                            32
https://ec.europa.eu/taxation_customs/sites/taxation/files/notice-to-stakeholders-brexit-ip-enforcement-final_en.pdf
33
OJ L 22, 26.1.2001, p. 1.
EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL TAXATION AND CUSTOMS UNION
Brussels, 11 March 2019
UIDANCE NOTE
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM AND ASPECTS OF EXCISE IN RELATION TO MOVEMENT OF GOODS ONGOING ON THE WITHDRAWAL DATE The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. This means that as from 30 March 2019, 00:00h (CET)
the United Kingdom will be a third country
This guidance note addresses a situation where the UK becomes a third country on the withdrawal date without a withdrawal agreement and hence without a transition period provided for in the draft Withdrawal Agreement.
As of the withdrawal date, the Union rules in the field of excise no longer apply to the UK. The UK will be treated as any other third country and the rules in the field of excise will apply as of that date. Furthermore, the UK will no longer have access to the EU excise IT systems. This guidance note provides guidance on the consequences of this for the cross-border intra-EU movement of excise goods between the UK and EU27, which started before the withdrawal date and will end thereafter. This document covers as well as the related features (e.g. registration and authorisations of economic operators, administrative cooperation). This document should be read in conjunction with the Guidance Note on customs issues.
Intra-EU cross-border movements of excise goods are subject to conditions and procedures specified in Directive 2008/118/EC and its related implementing regulations. Excise goods may be moved under duty suspension or while already released for consumption ("duty paid"). In the former case (duty suspension), registration and

n accordance with Article 50(3) of the Treaty on European Union, the European Council, in agreement with the United Kingdom, may unanimously decide that the Treaties cease to apply at a later date.
A third country is a country not member of the EU.
Cf. Part four of the Agreement on the withdrawal of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland from the European Union and the European Atomic Energy Community (OJ, C 66 I, 19.2.2019, p. 1

See also the "Notices to stakeholders" published by the Commission services in the area of EU customs law (https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness/preparedness-notices_en#tradetaxud).
authorisation of Economic Operators are pre-requisite; moreover, the procedures are computer-based and supported by pan-European IT systems called EMCS
for movement control and SEED
for registering excise economic operators. The withdrawal of the UK may have an impact for Economic Operators involved in the intra-EU cross-border movements of excise goods to, from, and via the UK. In particular, consignors, consignees, and guarantors should prepare for a withdrawal of the UK without a withdrawal agreement and examine their new obligations and liabilities as of the withdrawal date
1.
VERVIEW OF THE EXCISE CONSEQUENCES OF A O DEAL WITHDRAWAL OF THE UK 1.1. General Principles Excise goods that enter the excise territory of the EU from the UK or are dispatched or transported from the excise territory of the EU to the UK will respectively be treated as importation or exportation of excise goods in accordance with Council Directive 2008/118/EC of 16 December 2008 concerning the general arrangements for excise duty
Goods in transit crossing the UK land bridge between Ireland and the rest of the European Union will also be subject to additional customs formalities. 1.2. Pan-European IT system EMCS The Excise Movement and Control System (EMCS) on its own will no longer be applicable to excise duty suspended movements of excise goods from the EU into the UK, but those movements will be treated as exports, where excise supervision ends at the place of exit from the EU. Movements of excise goods to the UK will therefore require an export declaration as well as an electronic administrative document (e-AD). In case of movements of excise goods from the UK to the EU customs formalities will have to be completed before a movement under EMCS can begin
1.3. Customs Formalities If economic operators wish to continue moving excise goods to the UK or receiving goods from the UK they will need to familiarise themselves with customs formalities and should be prepared to register with the customs authorities in the Member State where they are established, in order to be assigned an EORI number, if they do not already have one. Nothing prevents those economic operators submitting the required data for the registration (Annex 12-01 UCC-DA)
before the withdrawal date. Further details can be
Excise Movement and Control System
System for Exchange of Excise Data
OJ L9, 14.1.2009, p. 12
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2015/2446 of 28 July 2015 supplementing Regulation (EU) No 952/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council as regards detailed rules concerning certain provisions of the Union Customs Code (OJ L343, 29.12.2015, p. 1)
found in the Commission services.
Stakeholders of excise movements should also consult the  Withdrawal of the United Kingdom and customs-related matters in case of no 10, in particular for further details about Union status, import, export and transit. 2.
NGOING INTRA
NION CROSS-BORDER MOVEMENTS An  is an intra-Union cross-border movement of excise goods that began but did not end before the withdrawal date. 2.1. General Principles As of the withdrawal date:  Unless explicitly stated otherwise in this document, UK authorisations and decisions are no longer valid in EU27. Consequently, any e-AD11, SAAD12 or fallback excise document approved by the UK competent authority before the withdrawal date is no longer a valid proof of Union status for the goods.  No electronic messages can be exchanged between the UK and EU27 Member States via EU-managed communication platforms such as CCN; consequently, no EMCS message and no CCN Mail message may be exchanged between the UK and EU27 Member States
No new intra-EU movement of excise goods to or from the UK may start; a corollary is that no new e-AD or SAAD may be assigned for such movements.  Unless explicitly stated otherwise in this document, all ongoing movements of excise goods from or to the UK will be considered as movements from or to a third country with all applicable consequences (e.g. status of non-Union goods, applicable customs procedures, excise duty claims, or seizing of the goods in case of non-compliance). Attention is drawn to the fact that Economic Operators, who start intra-Union cross-border movement of excise goods to/from the UK just before the withdrawal date, run a significant risk as that they can no longer be ended appropriately as mentioned in the following sections. This will generate a significant administrative burden for all stakeholders, with a risk of irregularities.  Moreover, if the excise goods arrive at destination before the
https://ec.europa.eu/taxation_customs/uk_withdrawal_en; and https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness/preparedness-notices_en#tradetaxud
10
https://ec.europa.eu/info/brexit/brexit-preparedness/preparedness-notices_en#tradetaxud 11
electronic Administrative Document 12
Simplified Accompanying Administrative Document
withdrawal date, Economic Operators should submit the report of receipt or SAAD Copy 3 (where applicable) as soon as possible to ensure the excise movement is also completed before the withdrawal date.  Moreover, stakeholders involved in an excise movement to or from the UK that is at risk not to be completed before the withdrawal date should take contingency measures (e.g. contact exporters or importers where appropriate) in due time, taking into account the distance between the UK and the EU27 Member States.13 2.2. Excise goods under Duty Suspension For ongoing movement
of excise goods under duty suspension to, from or through the UK:  Unless explicitly stated otherwise in this document,
Reports of Receipt or of Export cannot be electronically exchanged and fallback documents are no longer automatically mutually recognised between EU27 and the UK;
Ongoing EMCS movements will have to be closed by ad-hoc means (e.g. Manual Closure); alternate evidence of exit of the EU27 territory may be used to this purpose. Annex I  Recommended alternate evidence of exit
The data in fallback Administrative Documents related to excise movements from or to the UK may not be inserted into EMCS as of the withdrawal date as the UK will no longer be a valid Member State in this IT system. This exceptional case can cause an excise movement to remain partly or totally outside of EMCS.  As of the withdrawal date, the consignor authorisation required under Council Directive 2008/118/EC issued by the UK is no longer valid. However, if excise goods from the UK are in the EU27 territory on the withdrawal date
Member States should consider such movements as valid and they should be allowed to be closed normally14
If excise goods from the UK have not entered the EU27 before the withdrawal date, then the excise movement cannot be completed normally. The excise goods would be subject to customs formalities applicable to imports and subject to excise duty at importation, or would need to be placed in a tax warehouse or a new EMCS movement started for the place of importation under the responsibility of a registered consignor authorised in the Member State of importation
Alternatively an external transit movement, as provided                                                  13
For instance, a movement between the UK and Malta can take more than one month
14
E.g. via a Report of Receipt from the EU27 consignee or via a Report of Export from the EU27 Member State of Export; this report of receipt/export cannot however be forwarded to the UK, which was still the Member State of Dispatch at the beginning of the excise movement.
under the Union transit procedure, to the Member State of Destination can be started, which might reduce delays and formalities. Note: in any case, the EU27 Member State of Destination will have to close in an exceptional way (e.g. interruption) the excise movement in EMCS that began in the UK before the withdrawal date
If excise goods moving to the UK are still in the EU27 territory on the withdrawal date, the excise movements will no longer have a valid consignee. The consignor would have to issue a change of destination to report that the goods would be
returned to the consignor, or
sent to a new consignee in EU27 authorised to receive the goods
or
exported; this of course would require the lodging of an export declaration  If excise goods moving to the UK from the EU27 have entered the UK but the excise movement ha
not been closed before the withdrawal date then the latter cannot be closed normally in EMCS, since there is no longer a valid consignee for an intra-EU movement
However, Member States should treat such movements as valid and to allow to close them manually based on alternate evidence of exit of the EU27 (see above).
xcise goods moving through the UK between two EU27 Member States (e.g. from Belgium to Ireland) on the withdrawal date will be subject to customs formalities, if and where applicable, but the excise movement can still be completed normally.15
he excise movementeAD or fallback document will be a sufficient proof of Union status to avoid payment of import duty in the EU27. Other customs formalities will be the same as for other goods
Note: as the UK will have acceded to the Convention on a Common Transit Procedure16 by the withdrawal date, this should facilitate crossing the land bridge by allowing EMCS to be used in parallel with NCTS17, which should reduce delays and formalities
15
Council Directive 2008/118/EC article 17(1) 16 https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=LEGISSUM%3Al11025 17 New Computerised Transit System
The table below summarises the possibilities for ongoing excise movements under duty suspension: Movement Goods location on withdrawal date in UK in EU27 From UK to EU27 Customs formalities; closure (e.g. interruption) of the EMCS movement by EU27 MS of Destination + possible new e-AD from place of importation Consider excise movement as valid and to be closed normally From EU27 to UK alternate evidence of exit (evidence that goods are in the UK) to close the movement at EU27 MS of Dispatch Change of destination Through UK Customs formalities to enter EU27 MS of Destination and eAD/FAD is proof of Union status in MS of Destination: normal completion in other EU27 MS: Customs formalities to go through UK if applicable and eAD/FAD is proof of Union status
2.3. Excise goods already released for consumption (Duty Paid) Business-to-Business For intra-EU business-to-business movement of excise goods already released for consumption to or from the UK started before but still ongoing on or after the withdrawal date
EU excise procedures no longer apply; in particular, SAAD paper documents are no longer mutually recognised between EU27 and the UK;  If excise goods from the UK are in the territory of the EU27 on the withdrawal date, Member States should treat such movements as valid and to allow the consignee to close them
Where the consignee of a duty paid business-to-business movement can prove that the goods entered the territory of the EU27 before the withdrawal date but has not submitted the SAAD to the Member State of destination before this date to close the movement, the competent authority of the EU27 Member State of Destination should accept the SAAD.  If excise goods from the UK are still in the UK on the withdrawal date then they will be subject to import formalities on arrival in the EU27, including payment of excise duty at the border, unless the goods are placed under excise duty suspension within the EU27. A new excise movement would then have to be started from the Member State of importation to the Member State of Destination; alternatively an
external transit movement, as provided under the Union transit procedure, to the Member State of Destination can be started, which might reduce delays and formalities.  If excise goods moving to the UK are in the territory of the EU27, other than the Member State of dispatch on the withdrawal date, Member States should apply the same approach to such movements as they apply to the exceptional export of goods released for consumption to other third countries. In particular, where goods under cover of an SAAD cross the territory of a Member State other than the Member State of dispatch, that Member State is recommended to continue to accept the SAAD as a proof of a valid excise movement and not to charge excise duty if export formalities are fulfilled and where the goods exit for the UK. This requires an export declaration to be lodged. The Commission also recommends that the Member State of dispatch refunds or remits the already paid excise duty if the consignor provides a proof of exit.
The goods can also be returned to the location of Dispatch under cover of the SAAD
If excise goods moving to the UK are in the territory of the UK on the withdrawal date then proof of the end of the movement and payment of duty in the UK would have to be obtained that met the needs of the MS of Dispatch. There is no legal obligation for a Member State to refund excise duty in the case of exported duty paid goods. However, if the certified copy 3 of the SAAD was issued by the UK18 before the withdrawal date this should be treated as a normal excise movement and requests for refund of excise duty in the Member State of dispatch should be treated normally. Other refunds would be at the discretion of the MS of Dispatch.
xcise goods moving through the UK between two EU27 Member States (e.g. from Belgium to Ireland) may be subject to Customs formalities, although import duty should not be charged, since the SAAD is a valid proof of Union status.
Note: as the UK will have acceded the Convention on a Common Transit Procedure by the withdrawal date, this should facilitate crossing the land bridge by allowing the use of NCTS19, which should reduce delays and formalities
Note: Refunds of excise duty may not be available due to lack of legally acceptable evidence and the absence of a common legal base for refunds of excise duty on the export of duty paid goods. Any remission or reimbursement of excise duty in these circumstances is a national matter.
18 Or other document issued by the UK and accepted by the Member State of Dispatch, certifying that the goods have been delivered and the chargeable excise duty has been paid in the UK 19 New Computerised Transit System
Business-to-Consumer (Distance Selling) The same principles as business-to-business apply mutatis mutandis to distance selling procedures for intra-EU cross-border distance sales of excise goods to or from the UK started before but still ongoing on or after the withdrawal date. No distance sales of excise goods from or to the UK may start as of the withdrawal date. 2.4. EMCS ARC Follow Up The "EMCS ARC Follow Up20" feature on the europa.eu website (to enter production in February 2019) will remain available for EMCS movements to/from the UK that started before the withdrawal date. However, as described above, no new information exchange to/from the UK can be received via trans-European IT systems for the movements that were not completed before the withdrawal date. Consequently, the status of such movements will not be updated in "EMCS ARC Follow Up" as of the withdrawal date
For instance, if an ongoing movement to the UK is closed manually after the withdrawal date by the EU27 Member State of Dispatch then the manual closure will be visible only in the National Excise Application of this Member State and not in the common domain of EMCS. Therefore, the manual closure and the related status update of the movement will not be visible in EMCS ARC Follow Up. Member States are recommended to inform economic operators of this limitation and the unreliability of this information around the period of the withdrawal of the UK
3.
XCISE DEBT
EXEMPTIONS AND GUARANTEE As of the withdrawal date
no guarantee will be automatically mutually recognised between the UK and EU27 Member States;  no exemption will be automatically mutually recognised between the UK and EU27 Member States;  no excise debts will be managed between the UK and EU27 Member States; and  there will be no legal basis for calling upon guarantees held by UK consignors and/or consignees.                                                  20 EMCS ARC Follow Up is a feature that allows a user to enter an Administrative Reference Code and get limited information on the related EMCS movement (e.g. status, MS of Dispatch, MS of destination, list of main messages exchanged); it is a publicly available feature that requires neither identification nor authentication.
4.
CONOMIC OPERATORS REGISTRATION AND AUTHORISATION 4.1. Overview This section applies only to the Economic Operators registered in SEED, i.e. authorised to perform intra-EU cross-border movements of excise goods under duty suspension. 4.2. Expiration of UK registrations and authorisations As of the withdrawal date, the registration of Economic Operators established in the UK and their authorisation will be invalid. Consequently
they will not be able to send or receive new e-ADs (see also section
). Member States are also recommended to check that e-ADs have not been accepted before Brexit, but with a dispatch date recorded in the future after the withdrawal date.21 Member States should request that economic operators do not submit e-ADs with dispatch dates to after the withdrawal date.   No creation, update or new invalidations of registrations and authorisations of Economic Operators established in the UK will be possible after the withdrawal date
The records of such Economic Operators and authorisations will be kept in SEED for 4 years so that ongoing movements can be closed manually and EU27 Member States' auditors and other staff can access UK Economic Operators data. 4.3. "Orphan" EU27 Tax Warehouses As illustrated in the schema hereafter, it may happen that Tax Warehouses in the territory of EU27 are related only to Tax Warehouse Keepers established in the UK. In this case, such Tax Warehouses will be left "orphan" (i.e. with no authorised warehouse keepers established in EU2722) after the withdrawal date. This implies that such Tax Warehouses will actually not be able to operate intra-EU27 cross-border movements of excise goods under duty suspension.  Member States Administrations and Economic Operators are advised to take all necessary measures before the withdrawal date in order to avoid such situations. A measure can be to assign a valid warehouse keeper established in a EU27 Member State
21
An e-AD can be submitted up to 7 days before the planned date of dispatch
22 After the withdrawal date, the record of the UK tax warehouse keepers will still be present in SEED but their authorisation will be invalid. 10 Before withdrawal date After withdrawal date

EU27 warehouse UK authorised keepers only EU27 warehouse No EU27 authorised keeper
4.4. Access of the UK to SEED As of the withdrawal date, no SEED data will be shared with the UK. In particular:  SEED data will not been synchronised any longer with UK national IT systems
the officials of the UK administration will have no access to SEED on WEB (SEED's human user interface, which allows reading and modifying SEED data). This implies that as of the withdrawal date, EU27's and the UK's view of each other's Economic Operators data will be the "snapshot" at the time of the withdrawal date, when the latest data synchronisation will have occurred. 5.
EFERENCE DATA 5.1. Customs Office List and Excise Role As of the withdrawal date all excise roles will be removed from all UK customs offices in the Customs Office List. 5.2. Code Lists As of the withdrawal date, excise IT systems' code lists will not be shared with the UK. 6.
TATISTICS As of the withdrawal date, the officials of the UK administration will have no access to excise trans-European IT systems' operational statistics provided by the central IT component CS/MISE, neither via its user interface nor via consolidated reports. 7.
VAILABILITY MANAGEMENT As of the withdrawal date, no excise IT system's unavailability will be shared between the UK and EU27. 11 8.
DMINISTRATIVE COOPERATION As of withdrawal date, the Administrative Cooperation Regulation23 and the Naples II Convention, no longer apply to the UK. All pending administrative cooperation procedures on the withdrawal date on the basis of EU law between the EU27 Member States and the UK will be discontinued on the withdrawal date.
As of the withdrawal date, n
information exchange will be possible between the UK and EU27 Member States via excise trans-European IT systems such as EMCS or CCN Mail
It will no longer be possible to make new administrative cooperation requests or to receive or to send replies to open administrative cooperation requests.  However, mutual assistance requests concerning excise issues may be possible between certain Member States and the UK using the OECD-Council of Europe Convention of 25.1.1988 on mutual administrative assistance in tax matters.24
European Commission
irectorate
eneral Taxation and Customs Union
23
Council Regulation (EU) No 389/2012 24 Administrative cooperation in the field of excise duties: OECD-Council of Europe Convention of 25.1.1988 on mutual administrative assistance in tax matters between the UK (not including Gibraltar) and the following MS of the EU27: BE, BG, CZ, DK, EE, ES, FR, EL, HU, LV, NL, PL, PT, RO, FI, SI, and SE. Member States are advised to examine the detail content of their act of accession to check for potential reservations. 12
ANNEX

ECOMMENDED ALTERNATE EVIDENCE OF EXIT A document in which the competent authority of the UK certify the delivery25 or the entry into the UK territory in accordance with the rules and procedures applicable to that certification may be considered an appropriate alternate evidence of exit by EU27 Member States
Moreover, EU27 Member States may also take into account anyone of the following pieces of evidence or a combination of them:  (i) a delivery note;  (ii) a document signed or authenticated by the economic operator who has taken the excise goods out of the customs territory of the Union certifying the exit of the goods;  (iii) a document in which the customs authority of a Member State or a third country certify the delivery in accordance with the rules and procedures applicable to that certification in that State or country; (iv) records of goods supplied to ships, aircraft or offshore installations kept by economic operators; (v) other alternative pieces of evidence acceptable to the authorities of the  Member State of dispatch.
Competent authorities in each EU27 Member State perform their own assessment of the validity of such evidence.
25 Even though fallback documents are no longer automatically mutually recognised between the UK and EU27, a fallback report of receipt certified by a UK competent authority may be considered an appropriate evidence of delivery by the competent authority of a EU27 Member State.

EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL TAXATION AND CUSTOMS UNION
Brussels, 13 March 2019
UIDANCE NOTE
WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM FROM THE EUROPEAN UNION AND ASPECTS OF ADMINISTRATIVE COOPERATION IN THE FIELD OF VALUE ADDED TAX (VAT
AND MUTUAL TAX RECOVERY ASSISTANCE IN CASE OF WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM IN CASE OF NO DEAL The United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. This means that as from 30 March 2019, 00:00h (CET)
the United Kingdom will be a third country
This guidance note addresses a situation where the United Kingdom becomes a third country on the withdrawal date without a withdrawal agreement and hence without a transition period provided for in the draft Withdrawal Agreement.
1.
EFERENCES
REGULATION (EU)
O 904/2010
ARTICLES 45 AND 46.
UBJECT
SPECIAL SCHEMES PROVIDED FOR IN CHAPTER
OF TITLE XII OF DIRECTIVE 2006/112/EC
TRANSMISSION AND TRANSFER BY THE MEMBER STATE OF IDENTIFICATION OR THE UNITED KINGDOM (UK) TO EITHER THE UK OR THE MEMBER STATES OF CONSUMPTION OF THE RETURNS AND AMOUNTS SUBMITTED AND PAID BY NON-ESTABLISHED TAXABLE PERSONS REGARDING THE FIRST QUARTER 2019 UNTIL WITHDRAWAL OF THE UK FROM THE EU
AFTER WITHDRAWAL OF THE UK FROM THE EUROPEAN UNION (EU) WITHOUT A WITHDRAWAL AGREEMENT
As from the withdrawal date, Regulation (EU) No 904/2010 will cease to apply to the UK. The SCAC-Expert Group in the field of VAT administrative cooperation (SCAC-EG)
is of the opinion that, subject to reciprocity by the UK, the Member States of
In accordance with Article 50(3) of the Treaty on European Union, the European Council, in agreement with the United Kingdom, may unanimously decide that the Treaties cease to apply at a later date.
A third country is a country not member of the EU.
Cf. Part four of the Agreement on the withdrawal of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland from the European Union and the European Atomic Energy Community (OJ, C 66 I, 19.2.2019, p. 1).
Council Regulation (EU) No 904/2010 of 7 October 2010 on administrative cooperation and combating fraud in the field of value added tax (OJ L 268, 12.10.2010, p. 1).
Council Directive 2006/112/EC of 28 November 2006 on the common system of value added tax (OJ L 347, 11.12.2006, p. 1).
The SCAC-cooperation in the field of VAT.
2 identification shall transmit and transfer to the UK, as state of consumption, the returns and amounts submitted and paid within the legal deadline by taxable persons registered in a Member State of the EU-27 for the special schemes provided for in Chapter 6 of Title XII of Directive 2006/112/EC regarding services supplied in the UK in the first quarter 2019 before the withdrawal of the UK from the EU. The SCAC-EG is of the opinion that such transmissions and transfers will take place after the EU-27 has received the formal reciprocal commitment of the UK authorities and the technical arrangements regarding the reciprocal transmission of the returns in a secure way have been worked out.   2.
EFERENCES
REGULATION (EU)
O 1189/2011
ARTICLE 23.
UBJECT
TRANSFER OF AMOUNTS RECOVERED BY THE EU-27
EMBER STATES ON BEHALF OF THE UNITED KINGDOM (UK) BUT NOT YET TRANSFERRED BEFORE THE WITHDRAWAL DATE
As from the withdrawal date, Regulation (EU) No 1189/2011 will cease to apply to the UK. The Recovery Expert Group
is of the opinion that, subject to reciprocity by the UK, the Member States shall transfer and transmit to the UK, as applicant state, the amounts recovered by the Member States but not yet transferred to the UK before the withdrawal date, and the information relating to these amounts. The Recovery Expert Group is of the opinion that such transfers and transmissions will take place after the EU-27 has received the formal reciprocal commitment of the UK authorities and the technical arrangements regarding the reciprocal transfer and transmission in a secure way have been worked out.
European Commission
irectorate
eneral Taxation and Customs Union

Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) No 1189/2011 of 18 November 2011 laying down detailed rules in relation to certain provisions of Council Directive 2010/24/EU concerning mutual assistance for the recovery of claims relating to taxes, duties and other measures (OJ L 302, 19.11.2011, p. 16).
The Recovery Expert Group mutual assistance for the recovery of claims relating to taxes, duties and other measures, in accordance with Council Directive 2010/24/EU.
Commission européenne, B-1049 Bruxelles / Europese Commissie, B-1049 Brussel  Belgium  Tel.:
32
299 11 11

EUROPEAN COMMISSION DIRECTORATE-GENERAL  TAXATION AND CUSTOMS UNION Indirect Taxation and Tax administration Value added tax
taxud.c.1(2019)1857557  EN
Brussels, 13 March 201
VALUE ADDED TAX COMMITTEE (ARTICLE 398 OF DIRECTIVE 2006/112/EC)
ORKING PAPER NO 962 FINAL
GUIDELINES ON VAT RELATED ISSUES IN VIEW OF THE WITHDRAWAL  OF THE UNITED KINGDOM FROM THE EUROPEAN UNION
WITHOUT AN AGREEMENT taxud.c.1(2019)1857557  Working paper No 962 FINAL VAT Committee  Guidelines on VAT related issues in view of the withdrawal of the United Kingdom from the European Union without an agreement
/
QUESTIONS CONCERNING THE APPLICATION OF EU VAT PROVISIONS IN CASE OF WITHDRAWAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM FROM THE EUROPEAN UNION WITHOUT AN AGREEMENT CONTEXT OF THIS SET OF GUIDELINES
the United Kingdom submitted on 29 March 2017 the notification of its intention to withdraw from the Union pursuant to Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. This means that as from 30

1. Origin: Commission
References: Articles 63, 68 and 70 of Directive 2006/112/EC
Subject: On-going movements of goods from the United Kingdom to the EU-27 Member States at the moment of its withdrawal An intra-Community acquisition of goods is regarded as being made when the corresponding supply is effected. Such a supply may be effected at the time when dispatch or transport of the goods begins or during dispatch or transport. Given the principles of neutrality of VAT, legal certainty and the requirement to ensure a rational taxation that avoids double taxation, the VAT Committee therefore almost unanimously agrees that any intra-Community acquisition of goods of which the dispatch or transport from the United Kingdom to the EU-27 Member States started before its withdrawal from the EU shall be disregarded if the importation of these goods, as provided for in Article 30 of the VAT Directive, in a Member State of the EU-27 has taken place as from the withdrawal date. 2. Origin: Commission
Reference: Article 143(1)(e) of Directive 2006/112/EC
Subject: Reimportation of goods after the withdrawal of the United Kingdom The VAT Committee almost unanimously agrees that the notion of "reimportation", as referred to in Article 143(1)(e) of the VAT Directive, shall also cover situations of importation where goods have not been exported but were transported or dispatched from one of the EU-27 Member States to the United Kingdom before the withdrawal date and are returned from the United Kingdom as from the withdrawal date. As there was no export declaration, the VAT Committee almost unanimously agrees that the person who exported the goods shall use alternative means to prove that the goods are reimported in unaltered state within the time limit referred to in Article 203(1) of Regulation (EU) No 952/2013 laying down the Union Customs Code

In accordance with Article 50(3) of the Treaty on European Union, the European Council, in agreement with the United Kingdom, may unanimously decide that the Treaties cease to apply at a later date.
A third country is a country not member of the EU.
OJ L 269, 10.10.2013, p. 1. taxud.c.1(2019)1857557  Working paper No 962 FINAL VAT Committee  Guidelines on VAT related issues in view of the withdrawal of the United Kingdom from the European Union without an agreement
/
3. Origin: Commission
Reference: Article 4 of Directive 2009/132/EC
Subject: Personal property imported after the withdrawal of the United Kingdom The VAT Committee almost unanimously agrees that, where natural persons move their normal place of residence from the United Kingdom to an EU-27 Member State within
months as from the withdrawal date, the exemption laid down in Article 4 of Directive 2009/132/EC shall apply to personal property imported by these persons in the EU-27 as from the withdrawal date, insofar as the goods concerned have been in the possession of and, in the case of non-consumable goods, used by the person concerned at his or her former normal place of residence in the United Kingdom for a minimum of six months (except in special cases justified by circumstances) before the date on which he or she ceased to have his or her normal place of residence outside the EU-27. The VAT Committee almost unanimously agrees, however, that the exemption of personal property shall be made conditional upon such property having borne the customs and/or fiscal charge
to which it was normally liable in the United Kingdom or in one of the EU-27 Member States before the importation in the EU, in accordance with Article 4, paragraph 2, of Directive 2009/132/EC. 4. Origin: Commission
References: Directive
86/560/EEC, 2006/112/EC and 2008/9/EC
Subject: Refund of VAT charged before the withdrawal date in the United Kingdom or in an EU-27 Member State to taxable persons not established in the State of refund but established respectively either in an EU-27 Member State or in the United Kingdom Regarding VAT charged before the withdrawal date in the United Kingdom or in an EU-27 Member State to taxable persons not established in the State of refund but established respectively either in an EU-27 Member State or in the United Kingdom, the VAT Committee almost unanimously confirms the following: (1) As from the withdrawal date, Directive 2008/9/EC no longer applies for the United Kingdom, this entailing, inter alia, that a taxable person established in one of the EU-27 Member States or in the United Kingdom shall not be able as from the withdrawal date to use the electronic portal set up by his State of establishment for submitting an electronic refund application in accordance with Article 7 of Directive 2008/9/EC. (2) As from the withdrawal date the exchange of information between tax authorities relating to VAT refund applications provided for in Article 48(2) and (3) of Regulation (EU) No 904/2010 no longer applies in relation to the United Kingdom and any request for information by the State of refund with regard to a VAT refund application shall therefore be addressed directly to the taxable person concerned. taxud.c.1(2019)1857557  Working paper No 962 FINAL VAT Committee  Guidelines on VAT related issues in view of the withdrawal of the United Kingdom from the European Union without an agreement
/
(3) Those taxable persons who have not submitted a refund application before the withdrawal date, or in respect of which the refund application has not yet been forwarded by their State of establishment to the State of refund by that date, must submit their refund application directly to the State of refund. For the EU-27 Member States, this shall be according to the procedure by which Directive 86/560/EEC has been implemented
(4) The provisions on reciprocity (Article 2(2) of Directive 86/560/EEC), on the appointment of a tax representative (Article 2(3) of Directive 86/560/EEC) and on the exclusion of certain expenditure or possible additional conditions (Article 4(2) of Directive 86/560/EEC) shall not be applicable in respect of VAT charged before the withdrawal date. However, in accordance with Article 273 of Directive 2006/112/EC, Member States may require the applicant to provide evidence of his status as taxable person or the original or copy of the invoices. Although, as from the withdrawal date, Directive 2008/9/EC ceases to apply for the United Kingdom, the VAT Committee almost unanimously acknowledges that in regard to VAT charged to a taxable person before the withdrawal date the rights and corresponding obligations of taxable persons derived from that Directive shall continue to apply, encompassing notably the right to a refund of VAT, the time limits to submit a refund application, the information to be provided, the time limits to be notified or to be requested to provide additional information, the time limits to provide the requested additional or further additional information, the time limits to be refunded and the right to receive interest in case of late payment. Further, the VAT Committee almost unanimously agrees that refund applications relating to VAT charged from 1 January 2019 until and including the day before the withdrawal date shall be treated as relating to the remainder of a calendar year.